AN ENDLESS WINTER IS COMING.
The history of Rassilon is bloody. From the frozen far north, beyond the civilized lands
with their rolling hills and forests, arose a mighty army of frost giants, ice devils,
Hellfrost dragons, and fearsome orcs, servants all of the ice god Thrym. So began the terrible Blizzard War and the downfall of the mighty
empires of man.
Five hundred years later the races of the southern lands may have won the war, but they suffer its legacy still. For five centuries the winters have grown steadily longer and colder. Huge swathes of the land of Rassilon
are permanently covered in ice and snow, and even the temperate lands are not spared the
misery of failed harvests, deadly winters, and the dreaded Hellfrost wind.
But winter is not the only danger. A mere 30 years ago, magic, once the civilized races’ most
potent weapon, suddenly began to fail. The Siphoning, an effect of unknown origin, has
made magic an unpredictable ally.
Welcome to the world of Rassilon. Welcome to the Hellfrost!
PAUL “WIGGY” WADE-WILLIAMS
•
P L AY E R ’ S G U I D E •
The Hellfrost Player’s Guide contains everything you need to begin adventuring in the frozen wastes:
•
Six player character races.
•
Dozens of new Edges, including Disciple Edges for religious heroes.
•
Six alternate magical Arcane Backgrounds.
•
Details on 24 deities and their followers.
•
Rules for Glory, a new trait that measures the great deeds of your heroes.
•
Complete setting rules for adventuring in Rassilon.
Hellfrost: Player’s Guide is an epic fantasy setting for the award-winning Savage Worlds RPG
•
P L AY E R ’ S G U I D E •
EPIC FANTASY ROLEPLAYING
BY PAUL “WIGGY” WADE-WILLIAMS & SNOWY
CONTRIBUTIONS: CLINT BLACK
EDITING & PROOFREADING: RON BLESSING & DAVE BLEWER
GRAPHIC DESIGN & TYPESETTING: ROBIN ELLIOTT
COVER & INTERIOR ART: CHRIS KUHLMANN
COVER DESIGN: ROBIN ELLIOTT
WWW.TRIPLEACEGAMES.COM
PERMISSION IS GRANTED TO PRINT THIS EBOOK FOR PERSONAL USE ONLY.
NO SITE LICENSE IS GIVEN. EACH PLAYER MUST OWN THEIR OWN COPY.
WIGGY’S DEDICATION: MAGGIE (FOR BEING THERE) & SNOWY (WHO CAN’T ACTUALLY TYPE) ROBIN’S DEDICATION: THANKS TO MY FAMILY AND THEIR CONSTANT SUPPORT
©2009 Triple Ace Games. Hellfrost Player’s Guide and all related marks and logos are trademarks of Triple Ace Games. All Rights Reserved.
THIS GAME REFERENCES THE SAVAGE WORLDS GAME SYSTEM, AVAILABLE FROM PINNACLE ENTERTAINMENT GROUP AT WWW.PEGINC.COM. SAVAGE WORLDS AND ALL ASSOCIATED LOGOS AND TRADEMARKS ARE COPYRIGHTS OF PINNACLE ENTERTAINMENT GROUP. USED WITH PERMISSION.
PINNACLE MAKES NO REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY AS TO THE QUALITY, VIABILITY, OR SUITABILITY FOR PURPOSE OF THIS PRODUCT.
HELLFROST PLAYER’S GUIDE
HELLFROST ................................3 The Land .................................3 Where to Start .........................4
CHARACTERS .............................5 Making Characters ..................7 Engro .....................................10 Frost Dwarf ............................10 Frostborn...............................11 Hearth Elf ..............................12 Human ..................................12 Taiga Elf .................................14 Edges & Hindrances..............15 New Edges .............................16
GEAR ........................................31 Gear Notes ............................33 Vehicles .................................38 Fortifi cations .........................40
HEDGE MAGIC ........................45 Herbalism ..............................45
MAGIC ......................................49 Changes to the Normal Rules ..49 Magic & the Moon .................50 The Siphoning .......................50 The Hellfrost Effect ...............51 The Elemental Realms...........51 Magic Arcane Backgrounds ...52 Activating Magic Items ..........58
RELIGION .................................59 Patron Deities ........................60 The Gods of Rassilon ............61
SPELLS ......................................79
Trappings ..............................79 New & Altered Spells ............80
GLORY ......................................99 Gaining Glory ........................99 Glory Benefi ts .....................102 Losing Glory ........................104
LIFE IN RASSILON ..................105 Calendar ..............................105 Daily Life .............................107 The Land .............................113
ORGANISATIONS ...................115 Bludgeoners ........................115 The Convocation .................115 The Gray Legion ..................116 Hearth Knights ....................116 Iron Guild ...........................118 Knights Hrafn ......................118 Lorekeepers ........................118 Reliquary .............................119 Roadwardens .......................119 Sisterhood of Mercy ............119 Thieves Guild ......................120 The Thirteen Warriors .........120 Wood Wardens ....................120
GENERIC SETTING RULES ....121 Temperature ........................121 Terrain & Movement ...........122 Other Rules .........................124 Devine Aid ...........................125 Weregild ..............................125 The Weather ........................126 Hellfrost Character Sheet ....127 Index ...................................128
CONTENTS
Welcome to the Hellfrost Player’s Guide, your in-troduction to a new fantasy setting for Savage Worlds. Within these pages, you will fi nd everything you need to create a heroic character, whether that be a Hearth Knight fi ghting the terrors of the frozen north, an elementalist capable of controlling all four elements, a cunning tomb raider venturing into musty crypts, a slayer of undead braving the fog-shrouded tomb lands, a cleric of one of the many gods holding true to his faith in the face of adversity, a mercenary fi ghting in one of the numerous wars, or whatever else you can imagine.
LANGUAGE
Some of the terms used in this book take the form of Old English, Norse, and Germanic words, and are used as the basis of the dominant human language in the region. In general, words are pronounced as written, though a “g” is usually pronounced as a “y” and diphthongs use a drawn out fi rst vowel sound. Thus daeg (day) is pro-nounced as “daay.”
THE LAND
The land in which the characters’ adventures take place is known as Rassilon. Other lands were once known to exist, but these have been unreachable for centuries.
Rassilon is loosely divided into fi ve main geographic regions. Far to the north is the Hellfrost, a vast expanse of ice and snow, wherein dwell towering frost giants whose skin radiates intense cold, Hellfrost dragons, whose breathe is coldfi re, a fi re that burns icy cold yet can melt metal, frost vampires, victims of the intense cold who feed on the warmth of the living, and Hellfrost mammoths, whose breath can freeze a man’s blood in his veins. The permanent ice and snow radiates, so legends say, from a colossal spike of blue ice at the Hellfrost’s center.
Surrounding this is the outer Hellfrost, a realm caught
in perpetual winter. Hardy souls struggle to survive against the elements, frost giant raiders, orc tribes, and frostreav-ers, men driven mad by the Hellfrost wind, which howls across the plains and through the taiga forests.
Surrounding the outer reaches of the Hellfrost is the Icewall, a mile high barrier of solid ice. Many expedi-tions have been launched over the Icewall, but few have returned. Those who survived reported seeing only end-less tracts of snow and ice.
Next are the High Winterlands, a wild and dangerous realm where the temperature rarely rises near freezing point. As one travels south, so the snow and ice grow less, and one enters the Low Winterlands. Here life is hard, but bearable, though the temperature remains bitterly cold.
The southernmost region is called the Hearthlands. The mountains, swamps, forests, and plains have succumbed to the eternal cold, yet there is still hope. These are the most settled lands, though food grows scarcer each year and con-stant attacks by fell beasts drain valuable resources.
THE BLIZZARD WAR
A little over fi ve hundred years ago, a vast army swept
down from the frozen reaches, which were then much further north. Distant empires, their names now forgot-ten, were obliterated by large numbers of frost giants, Hellfrost dragons, and other frigid abominations.
The northern central and eastern regions of Rassilon were cleansed of civilization, only the dwarves, taiga elves, and Finnar humans surviving in any numbers—the dwarves by sealing themselves away in their mountains, the elves through ancient magic, and the latter lacking any cities to attract the invaders.
In the east, the armies of Aspiria and Chalcis rallied to hold the fl anks, while below the Icebarrier the Anari and Saxa were pushed back almost to the coast before rally-ing and driving back the invaders. Long winters and con-stant attacks devastated the land, but after several years, the attackers were forced back. As they retreated north, a gigantic wall of ice rose, and the Hellfrost formed.
HELLFROST
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
Since that day, known as Ice Rise, Rassilon has been gripped in a wintry fi st. Each year the snows begin ear-lier and last longer, each year the ground takes longer to thaw. Rassilon is slowly succumbing to a permanent win-ter. Many folk suspect the end of days has fi nally come.
THE CIVILIZED RACES
Rassilon has several sentient races. Humans are the
most common. They live across the Hearthlands and outer Hellfrost in cities, towns, villages, and isolated farmsteads. Of the many cultures which once dwelt in Rassilon, now there are just three—the city-dwelling Anari, the rural Saxa, and the nomadic Finnar.
In the frozen north and on the highest peaks, frost dwarves carve their fortress cities into rock and glaciers, seeking pre-cious metals and black ice with which to craft weapons and armor. Living among the great evergreen forests are the taiga elves, a species of elves at home in the cold. To the south are the hearth elves, cousins to the taiga elves.
Engros (singular engro) are a diminutive race of no-mads, traveling across the Hearthlands and outer Hellfrost in brightly-colored caravans. They have a poor reputation, being regarded as thieves and beggars by the other races. They are renowned for their indomitable spirit.
Finally there are the frostborn, a recent race who are more at home in the ice and snow than the warmer climes. The Frostborn have evolved from the other races, but they appear to be a new race unto themselves.
DARK FOES
Of course, the civilized races, as they are frequently
called, do not dwell in isolation. Giants roam the tundra, mountains, forests, and hills. Foul orcs and goblins gather their strength in secluded lands, waiting for the right time to surge forth. Intelligent undead dwell in unhallowed crypts and within the perpetually fog-shrouded land known as the Withered Lands, plotting the destruction of all life. Dragons circle high in the sky, arrogantly defying the lesser races to challenge them. Demons watch from ancient hiding places, corrupting those who would seek to enslave them. The list of horrors seems near endless.
MAGIC
Rassilon is a world of magic. Tendrils of magical energy
emanating from the moon touch every creature, granting them the potential to weave, focus, and manipulate magic.
Elementalists control the four elements, learning each craft in turn until they have complete mastery. Hrimwisards draw their power from the ice and snow, gaining great pow-er in colder realms and losing it as the temperature rises. Heahwisards rule over a vast realm from their lofty towers, their staves a symbol of their power and the tool by which they work their art. Dwarven mages carve runes of power on stone tablets as their ancestors did countless centuries before. Druids, common among the elves and engros, tug at the threads of natural magic, manipulating plants and
animals to their will. Skalds, also called song mages, chan-nel the threads into patterns through their voices.
THE POWER OF FAITH
Many gods watch over Rassilon, though an ancient pact prohibits them from direct interference beyond granting their followers miraculous powers. Clerics and paladins serve these deities, fi ghting their wars for them on the mortal realm and promoting their causes.
From the motherly white-robed clerics of Eira, goddess of healing, to the cadaverous dark-robed necromancer-priests of Hela, goddess of undeath; from the armor-clad warrior-priests of Scaetha, slayer of darkness, to the studious scholar-priests of Hoenir, god of knowledge, the servants of the gods cover the length and breadth of the land.
CULTS, CABALS, AND SOCIETIES
The Convocation of Elementalists watches over
students of the elemental arts, guiding, teaching, and manipulating. Hearth Knights, sworn to defend the Hearthlands from Hellfrost beasts, prowl the snow and ice. Wood Wardens guard the ancient forests from the ravages of man and beasts. Bludgeoners watch over the engros, safeguarding them against the terrors that would otherwise haunt their waking dreams. Knights Hrafn lead armies of men against the forces of darkness, using their superior tactical and strategic knowledge to win the day. But these heroic organizations are not the only ones in existence. Evil lurks in the shadows, ready to strike at the fi rst sign of weakness.
WHERE TO START
Players and GMs should, ideally, read the entire book from cover to cover. The latter should understand all the setting rules before play begins.
Players should begin by reading the character genera-tion and gear chapters. Those who want to play mages or priests need to read the chapters on magic and the gods, as well. The chapters entitled Life in Rassilon and Organizations provide an overview of daily life and some major organizations the heroes may belong to or are likely to encounter at some point.
REQUIRED BOOKS
In order to fully enjoy this setting, GM’s need the Hellfrost Bestiary and the Hellfrost Gazetteer. The former contains a complete listing of the monsters and common archetypes found in Rassilon, covering everything from giant ants to zombie lords, as well as rules for creating rel-ics, the true magic items in Rassilon. The latter details the realms and major locales of Rassilon and contains dozens of adventure seeds. Of course, you’ll also need the Savage Worlds rulebook.
Characters in Hellfrost are typical fantasy heroes. We’ve given you a list of common archetypes to help you get into the right frame of mind. Once you’ve decided on the type of character you want to play, move straight on to Making Characters.
Avenger: The inhabitants of the Hellfrost, bandits, or orcs have taken away everything the hero ever loved. Friends, family, home, all have been destroyed. The one thing that keeps the avenger going is the thought of en-acting a fi tting revenge.
Bandit: As food supplies dwindle, starvation becomes a constant danger. Some folk have taken to taking what they want by force of arms or threat of violence.
Bladedancer: Elven warriors skilled in the use of two blades. Their movements, while spontaneous, look like well-rehearsed dance steps to non-elves.
Bludgeoner: Engro warriors highly trained in the use of the sling. They serve as a form of police, but only in engro society.
Citizen: Oak trees grow from small acorns, and some-times heroes grow from average Joes. Whether a widow seeking revenge for frostreaver atrocities or a farmer’s son looking for adventure, the citizen has become em-broiled in adventure.
Druid: Only the elves and engros understand the means to channel energy from the plants and animals. Druids are strong in the wilds, but they suffer diffi culties in urban environments.
Elementalist: These mages draw their power through the elemental realms. As an elementalist grows in power, he can master more elements. An elementalist who has mastered all four elements is known as an arkhwisard (archmage).
Explorer: The world has changed since the Blizzard War. Explorers travel through the lands, correcting old maps and detailing the new wonders of the near-frozen world.
Fighter: Fighters can be anything from hardened mercenaries to bodyguards to green farmhands looking to defend their homes.
Heahwisard (High Mage): Heahwisards draw magi-cal energies through their staves, and are extremely weak, magically, without them. They are also the ruling nobility of the lands known as the Magocracy.
Healer: As the ice advances, so starvation, disease, and attacks by monsters become more frequent. Heal-ers strive to stem the tide of misery with poultices and salves. While there are many independent healers, the Sisters of Mercy are the only non-religious organization sworn to this service.
Hearth Knight: The Hearth Knights are dedicated to the defense of the Hearthlands against the predations of the Hellfrost inhabitants. They operate only in the colder regions, guarding the roads to the few remaining towns beyond the Icebarrier and watching over mountain passes.
Herald: Heralds serve nobles as diplomats and mes-sengers. An attack against a herald is an attack against his lord. Thus, they receive fair, if not always truly hospi-table, treatment, even among enemies.
Hrimwisard (Hoar Frost Mage): These mages weave powerful spells by drawing the magical energies found in the Hellfrost through their bodies. The colder it is, the more powerful effects a hrimwisard can invoke.
Ice Rigger: As the land becomes locked in a sea of ice and snow, the races are turning more and more to ice ships, which glide over the ice and snow on long skates and skis. Ice riggers are sailors skilled at piloting these vessels.
Iron Guild Mercenary: Though there are many mer-cenary companies, especially in Vestmark and Sutmark, the Iron Guild stands apart because it only hires troops out to merchants requiring protection.
Itinerant Worker: Few villages are completely self-suffi cient. Itinerant workers are wanderers, offering their services in farmsteads and villages across Rassilon. Sample itinerant workers include healers, smiths, and priests. Itinerant soldiers are mercenaries.
Knight Hrafn (Knight Raven): The Order of the Knights Hrafn is a force dedicated to the perfection of military leadership. They care little for politics, though
CHARACTERS
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
few openly side with overtly evil causes. The Order main-tains no armies of its own, but instead hires out members to serve nobles.
Lorekeeper: Dedicated to fi nding and preserving knowledge, lorekeepers strive to keep knowledge from becoming forgotten.
Messenger: Communication is limited to the speed of a horse and the bravery of the rider. Part rider, part ex-
plorer, and part warrior, the messenger’s life is diffi cult, but it can be rewarding.
Noble: The nobility remain at the top of the social lad-der. Many ancestral lands have been lost, forcing younger children to seek their fortune through adventuring.
Outlaw: In these dark days, one can always rely on one’s kin, unless you’re an outlaw, that is. Whether be-cause of criminal activities or because they have been falsely accused by jealous rivals, outlaws are shunned by their kith and kin. Whereas bandits prey on the weak, outlaws are simply outcasts, and can still be honorable heroes.
Paladin: Whereas priests guard the souls of the faithful, paladins guard their fl esh. Some paladins are permanent residents at temples. Others travel the lands performing deeds in the name of their deity.
Priest: Many gods are worshiped across Rassilon. Priests form the spiritual arm of their faith.
Ranger: Rangers operate in the wilds as scouts, spies, explorers, and soldiers. Unlike Hearth Knights, rangers often patrol the Hearthlands to combat the evils that dwell there.
Refugee: The hero may have lost his home to Hell-frost beast attacks, been forced to fl ee because of crop failure, or had his home buried under the snow. Either way, he has no home to call his own and must survive on his wits and the generosity of others.
Reliqus: A member of the Reliquary, an organization devoted to locating, study-ing, and protecting magic items. Some members have the ability to identify relics from their markings, while others seek ancient magic from snow-buried crypts and temples.
Roadwarden: The roads of Rassilon have not been safe for many centuries. In recent years, a group of men and women calling them-selves Roadwardens have taken it upon themselves to protect the roads and safe-guard travelers.
Rune Mage: Found only among dwarves, rune mages focus the magical energies of the world through carved runes.
Scout: Scouts work for merchants, watching out for bandits or orcs, as freelancer reconnaissance troops for mercenary companies, and as guides for adventuring parties heading into the fro-zen wastes.
Skald: Skalds are sorcer-ers who work their magic
HEROES AND VILLAINS
Hellfrost is a setting which encourages heroic acts and brave deeds similar to those in the old Norse sagas or medieval tales of Charlemagne and his pal-adins or Arthur and his knights. Of course, players can elect to play villains if they so wish. Players who work at running a heroic character, one who makes sacrifi ces to benefi t others and risks life and limb so others do not have to, can earn Glory. As a hero becomes more glorious, he gains special bonuses. Villains are never rewarded for commit-ting evil deeds. In essence, a true hero loses some degree of choice in how he may act but improves because of it. Vil-lains have complete freedom of choice but never benefi t. Which type you choose to play is your call.
CHARACTERS
through the power of song. They also know music, stories, and poems, and they are welcomed at most settlements.
Thief: Even in this age of hardship, thieves still pray on those who have something of value. Some thieves are Robin Hood types, robbing greedy merchants and nobles and distributing the wealth to the needy. Others are out for self gain.
Trapper: Fur isn’t worn as a fashion accessory any-more—it’s worn out of a need to survive freezing tem-peratures. Trappers make a living by hunting down bears and wolves, and selling their furs. Trappers may not lead a glamorous life, but they’re hardened to adverse weath-er and often come across ruins while hunting prey.
Wood Warden: A mainly elven organization, dedicat-ed to protecting the forests of Rassilon. They are expert shots and know how to talk with mundane beasts.
Woodsman: We’re not talking about regular lumber-jacks, but the hardy souls who travel to the Frozen Forest to collect valuable icewood, which the dwarves use in their coldfi re forges.
MAKING CHARACTERS
Creating heroes couldn’t be easier. The only thing you need is a copy of the character sheet found at the back of this book or on our website, www.tripleacegames. com. Once you have your sheet, follow these steps to make your hero.
1) RACE
In the Hellfrost setting, you can play engro, frost
dwarves, frostborn, hearth elves, taiga elves, and hu-mans. Elves and humans are not genetically compatible, so there aren’t any half-elves in this setting. The same applies to other half-breeds, such as half-orcs.
Each race has its own advantages and disadvantages, as seen starting on page 10. Read through the various ra-cial descriptions, then pick a race to play. Once the game begins, you can’t change race, so choose wisely.
2) TRAITS
Now it’s time to choose your hero’s attributes and
skills. Unless a racial description says otherwise, your character starts with a d4 in each of his fi ve attributes: Agility, Smarts, Spirit, Strength, and Vigor. You then have 5 points to distribute among them as you choose. Rais-ing an attribute a die type costs 1 point, and you may not raise an attribute above d12.
You also have 15 points to buy your skills. Raising a skill by a die type costs 1 point as long as it’s no higher than the attribute it’s linked to. It costs 2 points per die type to raise a skill over its linked attribute.
All the standard skills are available in Hellfrost except Driving and Piloting. Riding covers controlling animal-drawn conveyances. Characters with an Arcane Back-
LANGUAGES OF RASSILON
Language Spoken by/in Alphabet
Anari Alantaris Isle, the Ma-gocracy
Anari
Arboreal Tree men, as well as most woodland fey
Elven
Aspirian Aspiria Anari
Auld Saxa Skalds, scholars, priests Saxa runic
Battletongue Warriors N/A
Beastspeech Beastmen, centaurs, harpies
Elven
Black Tongue Demons, sentient un-dead
Black tongue runic
Chalcian Chalcis Anari
Classical Anari
Scholars, Anari priests Anari
Draketongue Dragons Draconic runic
Dwarven Frost dwarves Dwarven runic
Earthtongue Gargoyles, trolls, trow Dwarven runic
Engrosi Engro Elven
Fey Banniks, glimmerings, grindylows, skogsra, wood wights, other fey creatures
Elven
Fingerspeak Thieves (sign language) N/A
Finnari Finnar N/A
Frosttongue Sentient denizens of the Hellfrost, including
Frost runic
Frostreavers, Hellfrost dragons, frost giants
Giant Giants Dwarven runic
Hearth Elven Hearth elves Elven
Orcish Orcs, ogres, goblins Dwarven runic
Saxa Saxa Saxa runic
Selari Extinct language once spoken in the far north
Selari
Taiga Elven Taiga elves Elven
Tuomi Tuomi Tuomi runic
Trader Humans, merchants, diplomats
Anari
Vendahl Vendahl N/A
Vindari Extinct language once spoken in the Cairn Lands
Saxa runic
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
ground also have access to special arcane skills. These are detailed in the Chapter Magic starting on page 49.
Characters begin the game with a number of languag-es equal to half their Smarts die, so, a hero with a d6 Smarts knows three languages. Languages aren’t rated by dice, and it’s assumed a hero speaks the language fl u-ently enough to hold a conversation. Available languages are shown in the sidebar.
The fi rst language a hero learns must be their racial tongue. Many heroes also speak Trader, a common language invented after the great disaster to help in re-building the world. They must pick this with one of their available language slots, however.
Once play begins, a character can learn a new language by devoting an advancement to mastering the tongue—as-sume he’s been practicing the language during his adven-tures, so he doesn’t have to spend any “downtime” on this. Heroes learning languages this way can know more than their Smarts allows.
Raising a hero’s Smarts in play does not automatically grant him a new language.
Unless a character is Illiterate (which is commonplace in Rassilon), he can also read and write any languages he speaks. An entry of N/A under alphabet means the language has no written form.
DERIVED STATISTICS
Charisma is a measure of your hero’s likeability, and is added to Persuasion and Streetwise rolls. Your Charisma modifi er is +0 unless changed by Edges or Hindrances.
Pace is equal to 6”, unless changed by Edges or Hin-drances.
Parry is equal to 2 plus half your Fighting die type. Edges, Hindrances, and some types of equipment can modify your Parry score. If the Fighting die increases above a d12, round all fractions down.
Toughness is equal to 2 plus half your Vigor die type. Edges, Hindrances, and Armor can modify your Tough-ness. Vigor can, in some cases, go above a d12. In such cases, all fractions are rounded down.
3) EDGES & HINDRANCES
Great heroes are far more than a collection of skills
and attributes. It’s their unique gifts, special powers, and tragic fl aws that truly make them interesting characters.
You can take one Major Hindrance and two Minor Hindrances. A Major Hindrance is worth 2 points, and a Minor Hindrance is worth 1 point.
For 2 points you can: * Raise an attribute one die type (you may raise your
attributes before purchasing skills). * Choose an Edge. For 1 point you can: * Gain another skill point. * Gain additional money equal to your starting funds
(if you start with 500 gold, you gain an additional 500 gold).
KNOWLEDGE SKILLS
In Hellfrost, Knowledge skills are generally the practical side of Common Knowledge. For instance, a character with a background as a siege engineer can use Common Knowledge to determine whether enemy catapults are in range, but he needs Knowl-edge (Siege Artillery) if he wants to fi re his own catapult with any accuracy. The following major Knowledge skills are used in the Hellfrost setting. Remember, if a hero buys a skill, the GM should make sure he has chance to use it regularly. Alchemy: Covers the creation of magic potions, scrolls, and other temporary items, as well as mun-dane herbal potions. Arcana: The study of arcane and occult matters, from the various types of magic to mystic runic alphabets to knowledge of the elemental realms or the Abyss. Area: The study of a given region, its people, places, and customs. The larger the area covered by the skill, the higher penalty a GM should impose for specifi c information. For instance, a hero who has Knowl-edge ( Hearthlands) should have at least a –4 pen-alty to know the name of a good tavern in Ostmark, whereas a character with Knowledge (Ostmark) should get no penalty. Knowledge of a character’s home domain is covered by Common Knowledge. Battle: The practical application of tactics and strat-egy, as well as logistics and recruitment. Also covers knowledge of famous battles, tactics, and generals. Craft: Every craft, such as carpentry, pottery, smith-ing, and weaving is a separate knowledge skill. A crafter can use Common Knowledge to appraise goods similar to his Craft specialty. Folklore: Covers the legends, stories, and poems, in addition to well-known gossip. Knowledge of folklore within a character’s home region is cov-ered by Common Knowledge. Heraldry: Knowledge of the coats of arms, ban-ners, and shield designs of the noble houses, clans, and religions of Rassilon. Knowledge of nobles and heraldic designs within a character’s home region is covered by Common Knowledge. History: Study of major historical events since the Blizzard War. Knowledge of events before the disas-ter always incurs a penalty, ranging from –1 to –6, de-pending on the degree of information being sought. Law: An understanding of the major laws of every realm. Knowledge of the laws within a character’s home region is covered by Common Knowledge. Monsters: This is broken down into specifi c types of mon-ster, like demons, fey, giants, golems, orcs, or undead. Religion: The study of the various deities and their clergy. Clerics and paladins may use Common Knowledge for matters regarding their own faith. Riddles: Riddle contests are a popular form of en-tertainment among the civilized races. Siege Artillery: Used for fi ring ballistae, catapults, and other siege weapons.
CHARACTERS
4) GLORY
Praise, fame, recognition, prestige, popularity, ac-
claim, renown, reputation—in the lands of Rassilon, a hero is remembered for his heroic deeds and daring escapades, not his social standing.
Consequently, all characters have a Glory rating, which refl ects a hero’s reputation due to heroic actions.
To start with, your hero has a Glory of zero. This can be modifi ed by the hero’s actions during the game.
A positive Glory score indicates the character is on the path to true heroism. Skalds sing songs about him, tavern patrons drink toasts in his honor and speak of his deeds in awe, and foes fear his name. Those who chose an infamous road fi nd their names reviled and quickly forgotten with the passage of time.
For more on how Glory works in the game and the rewards it bestows, see page 99.
5) GEAR
Next you need to purchase equipment. A list of gear
can be found in the Gear Chapter on page 31. Unless you’ve acquired Edges or Hindrances that change this, a hero starts with the clothes on his back and 500 gold scields (pronounced “shield,” and usually shortened to gs), the predominant currency of the Hearthlands.
Note that if you spend a Hindrance point to increase your starting wealth, it increases the full amount you gain.
6) BACKGROUND DETAILS
Finish your character by fi lling in any history or back-
ground you care to. Ask yourself why your hero is where she is and what her goals are. Or you can just start play-ing and fi ll in these details as they become important.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
ENGRO
Engros (which means “fellows” in their language) are a diminutive race of travelers of northern origin, driven far south by the Blizzard War. They live a nomadic life, traveling the Hearthlands and outer Hellfrost in their brightly-colored caravans. Though most earn a living as healers, tinkers, and itinerant laborers, they have a reputation for being thieves and ne’er-do-wells. In many instances, this is well-deserved.
As the situation in Rassilon worsens, with the harden-ing winters lengthening each year, more frequent attacks by bandits and monsters, and growing wars in Sutmark and Vestmark, the engros are slowly beginning to lose their nomadic ways. In Rushton, there is a sizable perma-nent community of the diminutive folk.
Despite being disliked by many peoples, engros are optimistic and high-spirited, even in the face of over-whelming danger. Though they have a strong will, they are far from stubborn, and appreciate those who change their ideas to suit ever-changing circumstances. Engros are, however, naturally suspicious of outsiders, consid-ering them unclean, uncouth, and ignorant. It is not an attitude which endears mutual understanding and cooperation.
Both sexes dress in brightly-colored clothes and wear headscarves. The coloration and pattern of the scarf denotes one’s tribal affi liation and allows engros to determine whether a fellow engro is friend or foe, long before they get into weapon range. Tribal rivalries can be extremely violent, for despite their small stature, engros are fi erce fi ghters and rarely back down from a fi ght.
Engros are religious by nature, though they rarely participate in organized ceremonies. Most families have a cleric to a single god, and when families meet, the clerics of the various gods perform ad hoc ceremonies. Though engros can learn elementalism and hrimwisardry, most practice a form of druidism, calling upon the natural magic of Rassilon.
Engros average just 3’ in height, though rare members have been known to reach as much as 4 feet. Their hair runs the gamut from white to black, although their eyes are usually brown or green. Most live for 70 years, though 100 year-old engros have been recorded many times.
Names: (Male) Bertrem, Jym, Odbert, Oxbow, Rod-gar; (Female) Daisy, Foxglove, Petunia, Rose. Engros have never used surnames, believing that a name holds power. Since it is thus impossible to distinguish one Bertrem from another on name alone, they consider themselves safe from curses and other evil magics.
RACIAL EDGES & HINDRANCES * Luck: Engros draw one additional benny per game
session. This may be combined with the Luck and Great Luck Edges.
* Outsider: Engros have the Outsider Hindrances
among all races other than their own. * Small: Engros average only about 3’ tall. Their small size
subtracts 1 from their Toughness and they are Size –1. * Sneaky: Most engros make a living operating outside
the law. They begin the game with either Lockpicking or Stealth at d6. Pick one. This cannot be changed later.
* Spirited: Engros are generally optimistic beings. They start with a d6 Spirit instead of a d4. Through advances and Edges, they can have a maximum Spirit of d12+3.
FROST DWARF
Although dwarves live predominantly in mountains, they always live above the snow line. A few tribes have carved vast complexes in the sides of glaciers, but the constant movement of the ice sheets requires them to forever create new tunnels. Still, the rewards of fi nding rare black ice can make it well worth the effort.
When the advancing ice and snow covered many of their more northern homes, frost dwarves built new realms closer to the Hearthlands. Where once there were only a few isolated tribes living in the high mountains, the increased snow and ice has enabled them to create new homes in what were once temperate mountains. A few tribes are even branching out into hilly terrain, searching for veins of gold and silver in lands previously considered unsuitable for long-term habitation.
Frost dwarves are often expert crafters and armorers, though their forges burn with coldfi re, a fi re which gen-erates intense cold rather than heat.
Although dwarves trade with the other races, they are mildly xenophobic. Their icy homes are vast fortresses, fi lled with hidden guardrooms and armories, not to mention lethal traps.
Frost dwarves have few clerics, and those clerics they have tend to follow Ertha, goddess of earth, or Tiw, lord of battle. However, they have long understood the power of runes, which rune mages shape to form focal points for magical energy.
Frost dwarves live for around 300 years. They have white hair and pale skin, though a few dye their hair darker colors (typically so they don’t stand out at a dis-tance in non-wintry lands). Their eyes are black as pitch, and show no whites at all. Most average 5 feet in height, but they are stocky creatures.
Male dwarves sport beards. The length one is allowed to wear one’s beard is determined by social status, and the number of braids determines profession. Nobles, for instance, sport fi ve long braids, priests and mages have four, warriors three, crafters two, and all other dwarves, just one.
Names: Frost dwarves are clannish and often reuse ancestral names. Surnames are always that of the dwarf ’s clan. Examples of male given names include Ari, Bardi, Geirstein, Hord, Ljot, and Olvir. Female names include Asleif, Herdis, Svala, and Thyra.
CHARACTERS
Clan names are formed from a de-scriptor followed by an object, such as Brighthammer, Foeaxe, Goldbeard, or Steelhand.
RACIAL EDGES & HINDRANCES * Heat Lethargy: Frost dwarves be-
come lethargic at temperatures of 53 degrees or higher. They have –1 to all trait rolls in such tempera-tures.
* Insular: Frost dwarves have long kept to themselves and rarely dab-ble in the affairs of other races. They have –2 Charisma when deal-ing with all other races.
* Low Light Vision: Dwarven eyes are accustomed to the gloom of the underearth. They ignore penalties for darkness in all but Pitch Dark-ness.
* Mountain-Born: Dwarves suffer no penalties for diffi cult ground in mountains or hills. When us-ing the Overland Pace system, they treat such terrain as one category lower.
* Slow: Dwarves have a Pace of 5”. * Tough: Dwarves are stout and tough. They start with
a d6 in Vigor instead of a d4. Through advances and Edges, they can have a maximum Vigor of d12+3.
* Winter Soul: Frost dwarves have +2 to Vigor saves to resist the effects of cold weather, and +2 Armor to resist the affects of cold, coldfi re, or ice attacks.
FROSTBORN
A century ago, there were no frostborn. Today, the frostborn are numerous, though not to the extent of the other races.
Frostborn did not evolve—they simply appeared. By whatever means has affl icted the races, frostborn can be sired by any race, though births through this method are still rare. However, when a frostborn mates, regardless of whether it is male or female, the child is always frostborn.
All frostborn share the physical form of their parents, but lack any of their racial qualities, possessing instead unique traits. Thus there are frostborn who resemble dwarves, engros, elves, and humans. In many respects, they are a new race, and one growing at a rapid rate.
Regardless of their heritage, all frostborn have blue-white skin, white hair, and pale blue eyes. Their skin is always cold to the touch, even when they sweat, which occurs at temperatures above freezing.
While some frostborn follow the gods of good, an
alarming number can be found in the service of Thrym’s legions. Whether the frostborn will become a force for good against the Hellfrost or become a fi fth column within the Hearthlands, none can say for sure.
A few frostborn live happily among their parents’ cul-ture, though do not feel truly at home there. Most have ventured north into the Hellfrost, intent on starting a new life away from prejudice and snide remarks.
Names: At birth frostborn are generally given names from their parents’ culture. Most, however, reject familial names, and instead adopt new names with a frigid feel, such as Frostmane, Icerazor, Rimehand, and Snowwalker.
RACIAL EDGES & HINDRANCES * Frigid Form: Frostborn have a limited, innate form
of hrimwisardry. They know all the powers below, which always have a Range of Self. They cannot learn new powers for use with this ability. In order to use these powers, however, the frostborn must learn the Hrimwisardry arcane skill (based on Smarts). They can buy this skill without taking the Arcane Back-ground (Hrimwisardry) Edge.
The frostborn’s innate powers (and trappings) are: armor (icy skin), environmental protection (against cold only), smite (icicles grow from hands or a held weapon), and speed (ice-shod feet).
If a frostborn takes an Arcane Background (Hrimwisardry or Miracles) Edge he retains his pow-
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
ers, but can still only use them on himself. If he wish-es to be able to cast armor on a friend, for instance, he must learn the spell like any other character. Frostborn cannot use any other form of Arcane Back-ground.
* Heat Lethargy: Frostborn become lethargic at tem-peratures of 53 degrees or higher. They have –1 to all trait rolls in such temperatures.
* Outsider: Frostborn are universally mistrusted out-side frostborn enclaves. They have the Outsider Hin-drance.
* Winter Soul: Frostborn have +2 to Vigor saves to re-sist the effects of cold weather, and +2 Armor to resist the affects of cold, coldfi re, or ice attacks.
HEARTH ELF
In the beginning, far back in the history of Rassilon, when humans and engro had yet to walk the earth and when the dwarves were found only in the far north, the elven race consisted only of hearth elves. The race lived in the warm forests of the world, acting as gardeners, caretakers, and guardians over the leafy realms.
Here they built great Elfhomes among the forests, building solely of wood both on the ground and high in the trees. At the core of every Elfhome is a temple to Eostre, the goddess of nature and patron to all elves.
The elves consider themselves the gods’ fi rst creation, though the dwarves argue this point. They chose to fol-low the teachings of the gods of good and set themselves up as their gardeners and the defenders of the wild lands, making their homes in the great forests of the world.
Since the Blizzard War and the expansion of the Hellfrost, many of their ancestral realms now lie far to the north. In days of yore, the Elfhomes were far from humans, whom elves consider to be unruly and annoy-ing children.
Nowadays, the elves have been forced to move into forests not only bordering, but inside human lands. Unfortunately, humans treat any loss of their remaining land as a serious matter, and human-elf relations are tense in many realms.
Fortunately for the elves, their druids and skilled archers have kept their homes safe. As the snow contin-ues its relentless creep, however, elves are likely to fi nd themselves pushed out of the remaining forests by both the ice and the humans.
Elves can live upwards of 500 years, though few elves over 400 years now remain. They are slightly taller than humans, but more lithe. They have blond or light brown hair and pale green or brown eyes.
Names: Elves do not distinguish between genders when it comes to names. Examples include Ailinnil, El-leneirlir, Lilime, Melasion, Niellan, and Sinrilli.
Elven surnames, when used, are often associated with natural events, such as Boughrunner, Leafrustle, Morn-ingmist, Sharpwhistle, and so on.
RACIAL EDGES & HINDRANCES * Agile: Hearth elves are graceful and agile. They start
with a d6 in Agility instead of a d4. Through advanc-es and Edges, they can have a maximum Agility of d12+3.
* All Thumbs: Hearth elves have an inbred dislike of mechanical objects (including crossbows). They have the All Thumbs Hindrance.
* Forest Born: Hearth elves suffer no penalties for Dif-fi cult Ground in forests. When using the Overland Pace system, they treat such terrain as one category lower.
* Low Light Vision: Hearth elves have cat-like eyes and so can ignore lighting penalties for all but Pitch Dark-ness.
* Natural Realms: Hearth elves who become druids treat Elfhomes as wilds, not urban areas.
HUMAN
Humans are the most populace race in the Hearth-lands. Having once roamed over much of the continent, they now fi nd themselves being pushed back toward the southern reaches, and their numbers been whittled away by starvation, disease, and constant attacks from the Hellfrost inhabitants.
There are four distinct branches of humans inhabiting the Hearthlands. In all cases, the plural form is the same as the singular (one Saxa, ten Saxa, for instance). Each of the four cultures is a general overview, for within each one exist numerous sub-cultures. The Saxa, for instance, were once a dozen or more peoples with a similar culture, but each with their own name and unique identity. The Anari invasion of their homeland, combined with intermarriage between the shattered peoples, wiped out many of these differences. They are remembered now only in song.
ANARI
The Anari are town and city dwellers, and consider
themselves culturally superior to the Saxa and Finnar, though their technology is no more advanced. For their part, the Finnar and Saxa see the Anari as soft, and doomed to extinction if the Hellfrost advances to cover the remaining land.
The Anari Empire once dominated the western con-tinent, and even extended far north, into lands now hidden behind the Icewall. Decadence, hereditary mad-ness in the Imperial family, and the terrible Blizzard War put an end to the great empire, and now the Anari are a fractured race.
Most Anari mages favor elementalism, though natu-rally those of the Magocracy practice only heahwisardry. Song magic is considered backward, a throwback to less civilized times. The Anari have few cultural deities, and individuals generally pick and choose their own pre-
CHARACTERS
ferred deities. Again, the Magocratic Anari are different, placing Maera above all others.
Anari fashions vary immensely by culture. Whereas the nobles of the Magocracy favor colored robes and leather shoes, for instance, the citizens of Aspiria prefer woolen shirts, heavy linen trousers, and knee-high boots.
Anari average 5’ 6” and have darker skin than the other human cultures. Their hair is dark brown or black, and their eyes are usually green or brown.
Names: (Male) Argius, Bron, Bovert, Delbaeth, Emer-ic, Gaidon, Garth, Howel, Patris, Rochad, Serin, Thosa; (Female) Aife, Armide, Branwen, Elianor, Emer, Liaze, Lusiane, Tangwenn Ursanne.
Traditionally, Anari surnames are formed by taking the father’s name and adding ap-, such as Gobert ap-Patris. “Ap” simply means “child of.” This practice is slowly fall-ing out of favor, especially in the towns and cities. More folk are adopting their trade as a surname (Smith, Tailor, Weaver), or simply throwing together letters to make completely new names.
FINNAR
The Finnar are a nomadic people, and have always
lived in the colder climes. They have suffered little with the advancement of the Hellfrost, for as the snow and ice moved south, so did the Finnar, always one step ahead of disaster.
Pushed further toward the Hearthlands, the Finnar have come into confrontation with Saxa settlers, on whose lands the Finnar now live. No violence has erupted, but as food grows short, the two cultures fi nd themselves competing for the same, sparse resources.
Like the taiga elves, with whom they have a generally good rapport, the Finnar prefer to live in tents. Made of felt wrapped around a wooden frame, they are warm even in the harshest winters, and easily portable by rein-deer, the Finnar’s preferred beast of burden.
They are extremely pragmatic, a habit vital to surviv-ing the frozen wastes, and do not waste resources caring for those whose fate is sealed. Nor do they offer hospital-ity to those not capable of looking after themselves in the wintry landscape.
Finnar mages typically learn song magic or hrim-wisardry, the latter being seen as a natural form of magic among their people, and treated no different than el-ementalism. Ullr is the most popular god, with Freo and Eostre close behind.
Clothing differs little between the sexes, both favoring thick woolen tunics and trousers. Gloves, hats, and long socks (worn beneath felt boots) are considered essential during winter. During the brief summer, both sexes wear reindeer skin tunics and trousers.
Finnar tend to be short for humans, averaging only 5’ 6”, and tend toward dark hair. Their skin is usually brown, weathered by the raw winds and tanned by the sun refl ecting off snow and ice.
Names: (Male) Arto, Kaiju, Konsta, Taneli, Tove, Vilho; (Female) Esko, Hannu, Kaari, Merja, Pirkka, Tyko;
(Surnames) Aho, Hietanen, Jarnefelt, Paatalo, Petelius, Stenvall, Utrio, Waltari.
SAXA
The Saxa are clannish folk, primarily living in small
farmsteads and villages, though a number of Saxa towns exist. Most such towns are royal territories, and thus house the court, or trading centres.
Even before the Blizzard War, the Saxa preferred this existence. Steads house entire extended families, some-times numbering as many as 70 souls, and are protected by stout wooden fences, making them into mini-fortifi ed villages.
Their culture is based on oaths of friendship and loyalty and the principal of hospitality, the latter extend-ing even to enemies so long as they obey the age old customs and laws governing hospitality.
Saxa mages prefer song magic above all others. Those who do study elementalism prefer earth magic, and many never advance beyond that single element. Of the many gods worshipped, Eostre and Kenaz are most favored.
Saxa men favor loose woolen tunics and leather trou-sers. Boots are worn high, strapped to the leg with cord to provide a snug fi t. Women wear long wool dresses fastened at the shoulder with ornate clasps. Cloaks are common among both sexes.
Saxa average just under 6 feet in height and have brown or blonde hair, blue or light green eyes, and pale
HOSPITALITY
The clannish Finnar and Saxa have long obeyed the laws of hospitality, though it is not exclusive to them. Most civilized races follow the basic tenets, with only minor cultural differences. The basic laws of hospitality are as follows. Characters who break these ancient laws receive a –2 penalty to Charisma for the next month, not only because word of their deeds will spread, but because the gods look badly on those who cannot follow simple courtesy. * Guests must be welcomed at any hour. * Hosts are responsible for the welfare of their
guests. * Guests must be given a minimum of bread, wa-
ter, a blanket, a roof over their head, and enter-tainment.
* Guests may not bring their host into disrepute while under his protection, nor raise arms against him, nor speak of him badly. This also covers his family.
* Guests may stay for up to three days without be-ing required to gift their host. After this, it is con-sidered extremely boorish to remain under your host’s roof without recompensing him in some manner worthy of his status. Gifts within the fi rst three days are optional.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
skin. Men grow moustaches and beards, though unlike dwarves there is no social bias to these, and wear their hair long.
Names: (Male) Agdi, Cynric, Edwin, Gautrek, Leofric, Penda, Runolf, Seaxwulf, Skuli, Wiglaf; (Female) Aalfwynn, Eadgifu, Gytha, Isgerrd, Skjalf, Thorgerd, Wulfwynn, Yrsa.
For surnames, Saxa add the suffi xes -sunu (“son”) or – sdohtor (“daughter”) to their father’s name. For instance Cynric son of Odwin is known as Cynric Odwinsunu.
TUOMI
The Tuomi tribes once dominated the Battlelands, Bor-
derlands, and stretches as far east as the Orcblood River. Never a cohesive people, they suffered constant attacks by the Anari during the early days of the Empire’s expansion and were all but eradicated in the Blizzard War. Today, they are the least numerous of the human cultures and confi ned to the Battlelands and Drachenlands.
A proud warrior culture, the Tuomi prefer to settle disputes with blood rather than words. Chieftains are typically the best warriors in the tribe. Diplomacy is left to priests.
Tiw, god of war, is highly favored among the tribes, as are the gods of nature, Eostre, Neorthe, Kenaz, and Thunor. Many mages are elementalists, though few join the Convocation, seeing it as imposing a false order on the power of nature. Skalds are not unusual, though they exist in far fewer numbers than among the Saxa.
Tuomi average around 5’ 4”. Both sexes wear their hair long and often dye it with natural dyes. Hair is rarely washed, as the Tuomi believe this weakens the brain. Their natural hair color is blonde or light brown, and their eyes are generally green. Interbreeding with the An-ari, and in recent times the Finnar and Saxa, has diluted the bloodline, and other hair and eye colors are more prominent than they were centuries ago.
Tuomi use woad and henna to create elaborate tat-toos, some of which hold magical power. In game terms, a character taking a Combat Edge may add the “trapping” of it being a tattoo rather than a particular technique or ability he has learned. The design is left to the player’s imagination.
Names: (Male) Achivir, Arcois, Bili, Brude, Canaul, Gart, Volas; (Female) Aniel, Bannatia, Breth, Cailis, Ila, Olfi necta, Tamia.
The Tuomi use nicknames instead of surnames (see sidebar). With tribal affi liation being so important to their culture, they always add their tribal name after-ward. Sample tribal names include the Argentocoxus, Bliesblituth, Canutulachama, Deocilunon, Muircholaich, and Tolarggan.
RACIAL EDGES & HINDRANCES * Diverse: Humans of any culture start play with one free
Edge of their choice or 2 extra skill points. The character must meet the requirements of the Edge as usual.
TAIGA ELF
At some point in the distant past, several elven tribes argued that all forests, even the great taiga that lay near the frozen realms, should become Elfhomes. After much debate, the race split amicably and a great host headed northward, keen to impose elven values on the virgin pine forests.
Here they dwelt in relative isolation, trading with the Finnar, dwarves, and the humans whose lands bordered their own, and knowing little of the races further south. Over the centuries, almost all ties with their southern cousins were forgotten.
Since the Blizzard War, however, taiga elves have seen their natural habit decline in ways similar to their temperate cousins. Many of the old forests were crushed beneath ice and snow, and those that remained have dwindled considerably. Although these remaining realms have shrunk, they have not been totally consumed, thanks to powerful magic that halts the progression of the ice into their realms. Unfortunately, the magic is only a delaying tactic, not a solution.
Taiga elves have white hair and light blue skin, but are oth-erwise similar to hearth elves. They have a similar lifespan.
Names: Taiga elves use only a single name, which usually (but not always) has a wintry, natural element to them. Examples include Flakerider, Frostmane, Icegleam, Nighteyes, Shadowweaver, and Snowrunner.
RACIAL EDGES & HINDRANCES * Agile: Taiga elves are graceful and agile. They start
with a d6 in Agility instead of a d4. Through advanc-es and Edges, they can have a maximum Agility of d12+3.
NICKNAMES
The Finnar, Saxa, and Tuomi often use nicknames instead of surnames. In large settlements this can be the only way of telling the many Edwin Wiglafsu-nus apart and avoiding confusion. Some nicknames are marks of respect or relate to a physical feature. Others are defamatory. A few even relate to crafts. Here are some example nicknames. Bare-Legs (wears a kilt or has hairless legs), the Bold, the Brave, Deep-Minded (thinks a lot), the Feeble, Fosterer (takes in children from other clans, often as hostages to ensure peace), the Gossip, Gray-Cloak (grey-haired), Hairy-Cheek (big beard), the Hunter, the Little, the Noisy, One-Hand, the Peacock (a man who spends too much time on his appearance), Ser-pent-Tongue (a liar or gossip), Skinfl int, the Smith, the Stubborn, Wartooth (a man who enjoys battle), the White (has a pale skin or is cowardly), X-Killer (such as Giant-Killer or Orc-Killer).
CHARACTERS
* All Thumbs: Taiga elves have an inbred dislike of me-chanical objects (including crossbows). They have the All Thumbs Hindrance.
* Forest-Born: Taiga elves suffer no penalties for diffi -cult ground in forests. When using the Overland Pace system, they treat such terrain as one category lower.
* Heat Lethargy: Taiga elves become lethargic at tem-peratures of 53 degrees or higher. They have –1 to all trait rolls in such temperatures.
* Insular: Taiga elves rarely dabble in the affairs of oth-er races. They have –2 Charisma when dealing with all races except elves.
* Low Light Vision: Like their temperate kin, taiga elves have cat-like eyes and so can ignore lighting penalties for all but Pitch Darkness.
* Natural Realms: Taiga elves who become druids treat Elfhomes as wilds, not urban areas.
* Winter Soul: Taiga elves have +2 to Vigor saves to resist the effects of cold weather, and +2 Armor to resist the affects of cold, coldfi re, or ice attacks.
EDGES & HINDRANCES
The following new Edges and Hindrances are available in Hellfrost. Where Edges or Hindrances are duplicated from the core rules, those presented below take precedent.
NEW HINDRANCES
APPRENTICE/NOVITIATE (MINOR/MAJOR)
A hero must have an Arcane Background Edge to take this Hindrance.
The character is an apprentice mage or novitiate cler-ic, and has not completed his training. Exactly why he has set out into the world before becoming a full mage is left to the player to devise. Examples include the hero’s mentor dying, the hero believing he is ready to face the dangers of the world, or the hero running away because of his mentor’s cruelty.
With the Minor version, the hero cannot start play with an arcane skill higher than a d6. A character with the Major version also has one less starting power than normal for his Arcane Background. Rune mages still be-gin with one rune, but have an arcane skill limit of d4.
BLACK SHEEP (MINOR)
Only heroes from the Magocracy can take this Hin-drance.
The hero is a noble of the Magocracy, but one who has rejected heahwisardry. This led to him being cut off by his family and ostracized by the magocratic nobility in general.
The character can never inherit land or titles in the domain, nor is he ever welcomed at his ancestral home.
Should his deeds ever threaten his family name, his rela-tives will take whatever steps are required to protect the family’s reputation. A disgrace to his family, the hero suffers a –2 penalty to Charisma when dealing with heah-wisards (including his kin).
The character cannot take the Arcane Background (Heahwisardry), Noble, or Rich Edges during character generation. The hero can learn other arcane backgrounds.
COLD BLOODED (MINOR)
When the temperature drops close to freezing, the hero grabs his furs and heads for the nearest hearth. He has –2 to Vigor rolls to resist the effects of cold weather.
GOD CURSED (MAJOR)
Your past actions have offended one of the gods. Pick one deity from Chapter 5 (Religion). Any benefi cial spells cast upon you by the god’s clerics, automatically fail. Harmful spells cast by the god’s priests do an extra
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
+2 damage. Opposed spells cast by the priest gain a +2 bonus to affect you. Arcane Resistance offers no defense against powers invoked by the chosen deity’s followers.
This Hindrance can, at the GM’s discretion, be re-moved after a suitably lengthy and arduous quest to ap-pease the offended deity.
MAGIC FORBIDDANCE (MAJOR)
The hero has no ties to the magical energies of the world, though he is still susceptible to them.
He cannot detect legendary relics by touching them, nor can he ever spend a benny to use these items (see page 58). Likewise, he cannot drink a potion (it has no effect and is wasted), read a scroll (the magic simply fails to function), and such like. Herbalist brews func-tion as normal as these aren’t truly magical. The hero cannot take any Arcane Background (Magic) Edge, either.
NECROMANTIC WEAKNESS (MINOR/ MAJOR)
For some reason, the character is highly susceptible to attacks from the undead.
With the Minor version of this Hindrance, the hero has –2 to trait rolls to resist an undead creature’s super-natural special attacks, like a banshee’s wail, a liche’s
death touch, an ice mummy’s frigid touch, and so on. With the Major version, the penalty rises to –4. It has no affect when Soaking damage from mundane or natural weapons used by undead, but does apply against special weapons, like a black knight’s unholy sword. Fear is not considered an attack.
ORDERS (MINOR)
While the character may have his own plans, he ultimately serves another power and is expected to follow orders when they are issued. A hero with this Hindrance may be an agent for a noble, a soldier in the Iron Guild, or a mercenary under contract, for instance.
NEW EDGES
Forbidden Edges: Ace, Arcane Background (Psionics, Superpowers, or Weird Science), Power Points, Rapid Recharge, Wizard, Soul Drain, and any Edges which list these as a requirement.
Altered Edges: Noble, Power Surge, Rich and Very Rich (see below).
Holy Warrior undergoes a few changes and can only be chosen by priests. Champion is only available to pala-dins. (See the chapter on Gods (p. 59) for more details on these two holy archetypes.)
NOBLE TITLES
Noble titles in Hellfrost are given in the table below. Unless a character is a member of the royal family, the highest title he can achieve is Duke. Typically, the eldest child takes a title one step below his father, the next child two steps lower, and so on. The mini-mum title a noble can hold is Knight, which may be used by several children. Engros, who don’t go in much for nobles, have their own limited social scale. A rye is a hereditary title carried by the head of a family, while boeri denotes the head of a tribe. There is only ever one krallis (king), elected from among the boeri at a grand meeting of the various tribes. A beti-rye is the title used by a child of any noble, regardless of his parents’ status. Among the Tuomi, a mormaer is the head of a tribe and comes (pronounced ko-maze) a clan leader. Ruiri is used to denote the child of any noble, regardless of rank. The titles kreivi, vapaherra, and aatelinen serve the same function among the Finnar. Female titles (listed second) are used by all the races. Anari and engro female titles are as listed. Saxa typically add the letter “a” to the end to denote a female title unless otherwise denoted, whereas Finnari titles are non-sexual.
Anari Saxa/Dwarf Engro Tuomi Finnar Elves
Knight/Lady Ridder Beti-rye/Beti-raya Ruiri/Ruira Aatelinen Leafl ord/lady
Banneret/Banneress Lendmann (not used) (not used) (not used) (not used)
Baron/Baroness Hauld Rye/Raya (not used) Vapaherra Boughlord/lady
Count/Countess Thegn (not used) Comes/Comea Kreivi Greenlord/lady
Duke/Duchess Jarl Boeri/Boera Mormaer/a (not used) Forestlord/lady
Prince/Princess Aethling (not used) (not used) (not used) Prince/Princess
King/Queen Cyning/Cwene Krallis/Kralla (not used) (not used) King/Queen
CHARACTERS
Healer and Jack-of-all-Trades have been renamed or tweaked and are only available as Disciple Edges (p. 20).
BACKGROUND EDGES
ARCANE BACKGROUND
See Magic on page 49 and Religion on page 59 for more details on the types of spellcasters available. Note that some Arcane Backgrounds have other requirements. This Edge can be taken after character generation. A hero may only have one Arcane Background.
Characters who take the Arcane Background (Mira-cles) Edge automatically gain the Connections Edge with respect to the specifi c faith to which they belong. This represents access to the faith’s infrastructure, as well as friends and colleagues. This does not count toward start-ing Edge limits.
In return, the hero also gains the Orders Hindrance with regard to the faith. This does not count toward his starting Hindrance limits, nor does he earn any points during or after character generation for it.
LIBRARY
Requirements: Novice, must be Rich or have the Lorekeeper Edge, cannot be Illiterate
This Edge may only be taken with the GM’s permis-sion.
The hero has one or more tomes of lore (see p. 37). The hero has a number of bonus points to spread be-tween his books equal to his half his Smarts die. He may apply the bonuses to a single book, to maximum of +3 for any individual tome, or spread it among multiple tomes as he wishes. Each tome must apply to a different skill.
Tomes should have unique names. “The Art of War” and “Military Tactics of the Anari Empire” are suitable names for tomes granting a bonus to Knowledge (Battle), for instance.
LINGUIST
Requirements: Novice, Smarts d6+, cannot be Il-literate
The hero is either highly educated or belongs to a schol-arly organization such as the Lorekeepers or Reliquary.
He knows his Smarts die languages during character generation (so a hero with d10 Smarts knows 10 lan-guages).
NOBLE
Requirements: Novice The basics of this Edge are unchanged from the main
rules. Typically, a character with this Edge has the lowest
noble title (his father being one or two steps higher up the social ladder) and rules a small village or hamlet. Only with the GM’s permission may the character begin at a higher social status. See the sidebar on page 16 for more details.
Further social promotions require family members to move aside (or die) to allow the character to assume a new title, and this should be worked into the campaign.
Characters from the Magocracy who want to take this Edge must also take the Arcane Background (Heah-wisardry) Edge. Heahwisards use the prefi x Mage- in front of Anari social titles (Mage-Knight, Mage-Baron, and so on).
OLD FAMILY
Requirements: Novice, Arcane Background (Heah-wisardry)
The character comes from an old and infl uential family. in the Magocracy, and the hero has been tutored in magic since he was old enough to talk.
He has +2 to Knowledge (Arcana) rolls due to ex-tensive tutoring in his youth and begins the game as a Mage-Baron.
OTHER FORM OF “NOBILITY”
While the Noble Edge typically covers those born to high station, this is not a fi rm dictate. The Edge can also be used to represent other character types. A player who wants to use the Noble Edge in an atypi-cal way should always consult with his GM fi rst. For instance, a cleric with the Edge may be the head of a small temple. The hero has the Charisma bo-nus (so long as he worships a good god) and Rich Edge because of his position, but has the drawbacks of tending to the needs of the god’s worshippers, collecting tithes, hosting ceremonies, and such like. He likely has control of a small number of laymen paladins (ones with no Arcane Background), who should be treated as mercenaries. A hero may also be a guildmaster. Normally this should be a legitimate guild, but with the GM’s per-mission, the hero may run a small thieves’ guild. A hero may be a guildmaster for a craft guild or per-haps run a way station for the Iron Guild. The hero must handle labor disputes, raids by the thieves’ guild, and so on. Although a merchant can be represented by the Rich Edge, one taking the Noble Edge might be a well-known merchant or have a sizable business. In return for the +2 Charisma bonus, he also has the hassle of balancing the books, negotiating con-tracts, fi ghting off competitors, and such like. Characters using Noble in an alternate way do not gain the titles listed elsewhere. GMs and players should work together to create suitable honorifi cs.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
RICH & VERY RICH
Both of these Edges are available, but with changes. A Rich character begins the game with three times
his usual starting money. Taxes, farm income, or a small business earns the noble 5,000 gold scields a year, after all standard bills, taxes, and tithes have been paid.
A Very Rich hero starts with fi ve times his usual start-ing money, and has a regular income of 15,000 gold scields a year.
In both cases, the player must describe how this income is generated. The GM may always refuse to al-low these Edges to be taken, or reduce the income from them, if the player cannot describe a realistic situation and cannot benefi t it from it while he is battling orcs and frost giants hundreds of miles from home..
For instance, a noble may generate wealth through his lands, leaving a steward in charge while he adventures. A master weaponsmith may well be able to earn a vast fortune, but how does he fi nd time to produce enough goods if he is constantly adventuring?
STYRIMATHR
Requirements: Novice, Boating d8+ The character owns a ship. More specifi cally, he owns
a smabyrding (p. 39) but with no ice rig. The Edge does not grant him any crew, however. Sail-
ors can be hired from most coastal settlements at the cost of 20 gs per month per sailor. A Noble hero may take the followers bestowed on him by that Edge as sailors.
WARM BLOODED
Requirements: Novice, Engro, Hearth Elf, or Human, Vigor d8+
The hero doesn’t have ice in his veins, but he is at home in the cold. He has +2 to Vigor rolls to resist the effects of cold weather.
COMBAT EDGES
BLOOD AND GUTS
Requirements: Veteran, Fighting, Shooting, or Throwing d10+
The character has seen his share of battle and bathed in the blood of slain foes. He has faced overwhelming odds and lived to tell the tale.
The hero halves the difference between tokens when making an attack roll in a Mass Battle if it is negative (round down).
COURAGEOUS
Requirements: Novice, Guts d8+ Against fearsome foes, a hero who can control his
fear stands a better chance of survival than one who suc-cumbs to panic. This hero has the courage to hold his ground, and chose when it is time to fl ee.
The hero adds +2 to all Guts rolls and subtracts 2 from rolls on the Fright Table.
DOUBLE SHOT
Requirements: Seasoned, Hearth or Taiga Elf, Shoot-ing d8+
Double Shot allows an archer to fi re two arrows in his bow at once, fi ring both at the same target at a –2 modifi er to the archer’s Shooting dice. The target must be within Short range. If the attack is successful, both arrows hit, causing normal damage.
Double shot does not work with crossbows or other ranged weapons—only with bows and arrows.
IMPROVED DOUBLE SHOT
Requirements: Heroic, Double Shot The archer may attack as above, but ignores the –2
penalty.
CHARACTERS
FAVORED FOE
Requirements: Seasoned, Smarts d8+, Fighting, Shooting, or Throwing d8+
The hero has a grudge against a specifi c race or type of creature, and has devoted time to learning how to best such creatures in combat.
When this Edge is taken, the hero must pick one type of creature, such as orcs, dragons, giants, elemen-tals, fey, undead, or demons. He has +1 Parry against his favored foe, having learned how best to engage them in combat. He also rolls a d8 instead of a d6 if he scores a raise on an attack roll against them.
This Edge may be taken more than once, but the hero must choose a new foe each time he takes this Edge.
IMPROVED GIANT KILLER
Requirements: Heroic, Giant Killer Instead of gaining +1d6 damage on an attack roll
against creatures three sizes or more larger, the charac-ter may choose to ignore their Armor or Size. This Edge does not work with area effect attacks.
MIGHTY SHOT
Requirements: Veteran, Strength d8+, Shooting d10+
The hero has learned how to use his full strength with a bow. The character calculates damage with his bow as Str+d6, instead of a fl at 2d6.
Mighty shot does not work with crossbows or other ranged weapons—only with bows and long bows.
MIGHTY THROW
Requirements: Veteran, Strength d8+, Throwing d10+
The hero has learned special throwing techniques. He increases the range brackets of thrown weapons by 1/2/4. He also treats his Strength as being one die type higher (max d12+2) when using thrown weapons at targets within short range.
NECROMANTIC SEVERING
Requirements: Veteran, Spirit d8+, Fighting d10+ Through training and confrontation, the hero has
learned how to penetrate the necromantic energy fi elds surrounding undead and sever their ties to the magic binding them.
The hero may make Called Shots against creatures with the Undead monstrous ability as if they were regu-lar creatures.
OVERSIZED WEAPON MASTER
Requirements: Veteran, Strength d10+, Fighting d10+, Size +0 or greater
The character may use two-handed melee weapons with one hand. He may only use one such weapon at a time, even if he has the Ambidextrous or Two-Fisted Edges, though he may use an oversize weapon in this manner and wield a standard one-handed weapon si-multaneously.
SCAMPER
Requirements: Seasoned, Engro, Agility d8+ Engro are small and quick. Some make great use of
this in combat too, scampering about to avoid the furi-ous blows of their larger opponents.
Opponents of man-size or larger subtract 1 from at-tack rolls against engros with this Edge. The benefi t only applies when the character is aware the attack is coming, is unbound and able to move freely, and has no encum-brance penalty.
SHIELDWALL
Requirements: Seasoned, Block, medium or large shield
This Edge allows a hero to defend a comrade so long as the hero is using a medium or large shield.
Attacks against one character adjacent to the hero suf-fer modifi ers based on the hero’s shield type. If there are multiple heroes with this Edge adjacent to a character or the target has his own shield, only the best modifi er applies. A hero adjacent to multiple allies must declare which one he is protecting at the start of his turn.
The hero also keeps his shield modifi er if he is at-tacked.
SNOW WALKER
Requirements: Novice, Agility d6+ The hero has learned to move easily over the worst
snows and ice. In snow, every inch of movement counts as 1.5” instead of 2”. He treats rough ice as normal ter-rain and smooth ice as rough ice.
When using Overland Pace (see page 122), the hero treats snowy ground as standard terrain with no path.
IMPROVED SNOW WALKER
Requirements: Seasoned, Snow Walker The hero treats snow and smooth ice as normal
ground. When using Overland Pace (see page 122), the hero treats snowy ground as average terrain.
SUNDER
Requirements: Seasoned, Frost Dwarf, Strength d8+
Any hand or ranged weapon in the hands of a charac-ter with this Edge ignores 1 point of armor (in addition to any AP the weapon has). This Edge applies against all forms of armor, whether natural or crafted.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
IMPROVED SUNDER
Requirements: Veteran, Sunder As above, except the character ignores 2 points of
armor.
WALL OF STEEL
Requirements: Veteran, Agility d8+, Fighting d8+, Notice d8+
The character has the perception, skill, and agility to handle multiple foes. Opponents gain no Gang Up bonus against the hero.
WAR CRY
Requirements: Seasoned, Frost Dwarf or Saxa, In-timidation d8+
Dwarves and Saxa can bellow an ear-splitting, nerve-wracking war cry that has been known to send lesser foes fl eeing from the fi eld.
When used, the character may make an Intimidation roll against all targets in an area (as opposed to a single victim as usual). Place the edge of a Large Burst Template adjacent to the character. Every creature, friend and foe, within the circle must roll against the hero’s Intimidation total.
DISCIPLE EDGES
Priests and paladins of the various faiths each have
access to a unique Edge, which signifi es a blessing from their deity.
Should a hero commit a sin and lose access to his miracles, he also loses the benefi ts of the Edge until he atones. Unless otherwise stated, bonuses stack with simi-lar bonuses from other sources.
DISCIPLE OF DARGAR
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mira-cles), Strength d8+, Faith d8+, Fighting d8+, Intimida-tion d8+, follower of Dargar
When a disciple of Dargar Incapacitates an Extra in one blow (death must occur as a result of a single hit to the target, not two Shaken results), all adjacent allies of the victim must make a Spirit roll or be Shaken. If he Incapacitates an unwounded Wild Card in a single blow (the blow must cause 4 or more wounds), all Extras al-lied to the victim within sight of the hero must make a Spirit roll or be Panicked.
Additionally, clergy may learn the War Cry Edge, ig-noring the racial requirements.
DISCIPLE OF EIRA
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mir-acles), Spirit d8+, Faith d8+, Healing d6+, follower of Eira.
A character with this Edge adds +2 to all Healing rolls, whether natural or magical in nature. Up to fi ve companions traveling with a Healer add the bonus to their natural Healing rolls as well.
DISCIPLE OF EOSTRE ANIMALMOTHER
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mira-cles), Spirit d8+, Faith d8+, Beast Bond, Husbander or Reaper of Eostre
Eostre blesses her chosen with a better understand-ing of animals. The hero gains the benefi ts of the Beast Master Edge, but the chosen companion is a Wild Card. It earns experience as a player character and should be treated as an animal Sidekick. If killed, it is replaced after 2d6 weeks, if possible.
DISCIPLE OF EOSTRE PLANTMOTHER
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mir-acles), Agility d8+, Spirit d8+, Vigor d8+, Faith d8+, Sower or Reaper of Eostre
The hero suffers no penalties for moving in natural diffi cult terrain predominantly made up of vegetation. The hero has +1 to Faith rolls in areas of vegetation, such as forests and cultivated fi elds (but not typical gar-dens). In addition, the hero may use the Champion and Holy Warrior Edges (as appropriate) against creatures with the Plant Special Ability.
DISCIPLE OF ERTHA
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mir-acles), Vigor d8+, Climbing d6+, Faith d8+, Survival d6+, follower of Ertha
Although they are likely to be from a surface-dwell-ing race, priests of Ertha are renowned for their physical toughness and skill beneath the earth. They have +1 Toughness. While underground, they have +2 to all Survival rolls.
DISCIPLE OF FREO
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Miracles), Agility d8+, Vigor d8+, Faith d8+, follower of Freo.
The god of travel makes the journeys of his faithful easier. The hero treats all terrain as one category lower when using the Overland Pace system (p. 122). In tacti-cal combat, he treats all terrain as normal ground. He still suffers other effects of the terrain, such as ice being slippery underfoot.
DISCIPLE OF HELA
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mira-cles), Spirit d8+, Faith d8+, Guts d6+, follower of Hela
When the character is in a graveyard, tomb, necropo-lis, or other area commonly associated with death, he
CHARACTERS
gains +1 to all Faith rolls. In addition, if the cleric scores two raises on his Faith when casting zombie or greater zombie, the undead are permanent, and remain active until destroyed. They cannot be dispelled.
DISCIPLE OF HOENIR
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Miracles), Smarts d10+, Faith d8+, Scholar, follower of Hoe-nir
Disciples of Hoenir are renowned for their wisdom. With the exception of skills covered by his Scholar Edge, the hero gains +1 to all Knowledge skill rolls in which he has at least a d4, as well as to all Common Knowl-edge rolls.
In addition, the hero may make unskilled rolls for any Knowledge skill (even ones not allowed un-trained), though at a d4–2 as nor-mal. This Edge has no effect on other Smarts-linked skills.
DISCIPLE OF HOTHAR
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Miracles), Smarts d8+, Faith d8+, Notice d6+, Investigator, follower of Hothar
Disciples of Hothar are not easily swayed by words, and have +2 to resist any means to affect their mind, including Tests of Will, and defense against spells such as confusion and puppet. The former stacks with Strong Willed.
DISCIPLE OF KENAZ
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mira-cles), Vigor d8+, Faith d8+, follower of Kenaz
The hero gains a resistance to fi re and heat. The hero has +2 to Vigor rolls to resist the effects of Heat. He also has +4 Armor against damage caused by fi re or heat (such as a fi ery blast or a lava stream).
In addition, priests and paladins can cause their metal weapons to glow with magical heat. This causes +2 damage against creatures Resistant to cold and +4 against Immunity (Cold) creatures, and stacks with smite. A disciple may use this ability at will as long as he holds the blade in his hand.
Heated weapons illuminate an area 6” in diameter. They can be used to start fi res, but this is a slow process more suitable for creating a small campfi re than setting someone alight. Don’t check to see if a foe catches fi re from a hit unless the victim is particularly fl ammable. Even then there is only a 1 in 6 chance of setting the foe alight.
DISCIPLE OF MAERA
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Miracles), Smarts d8+, Spirit d6+, Faith d8+, follower of Maera
Although some magicians deny the deity is behind their art, priests of the Mistress of Magic know better, and are happy to show sorcerers how narrow-minded they are.
Disciples can learn any spell not on their spell list, but suffer a –2 penalty to their Faith rolls when casting them. This is subject to Rank restrictions as normal. Maera’s priests have an in depth understanding of magic. When casting dispel, the cleric has +2 to his Faith roll.
DISCIPLE OF NAUTHIZ
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mir-acles), Agility d10+, Faith d8+, Gambling d8+, Thief, follower of Nauthiz
The Thief Lord is exceptionally generous to his most devoted followers. Priests who roll a 1 on their Gambling, Lockpicking, or Stealth die, regardless of Wild Die, may make an automatic reroll, as if they had spent a benny. Should the reroll fail, however, the hero suffers a level of Fatigue for 24 hours as a sign of his god’s displeasure. This can lead to Incapacitation, but never Death.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
DISCIPLE OF NEORTHE
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mir-acles), Vigor d8+, Boating d6+, Faith d6+, Swimming d6+, follower of Neorthe
The character halves his daily water requirements. In addition, the character makes a Vigor roll every 12 hours after the fi rst day without water instead of every six, as normal. He can survive for a number of rounds equal to his Vigor die when drowning.
DISCIPLE OF NIHT
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mira-cles), Notice d6+, Faith d8+, Notice d8+, Stealth d8+, follower of Niht
Niht grants her priesthood the ability to see even in pitch darkness. The character ignores penalties for Dim and Dark Lighting, and has only a –2 penalty in Pitch Darkness. This works even against magic darkness, such as the obscure power.
DISCIPLE OF THE NORNS
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mira-cles), Smarts d8+, Faith d8+, follower of The Norns
Devotees of the Norns are able to read omens and give auguries, which give vague glimpses into the weave of a man’s life.
To make an augury, every hero who wishes to be involved in the augury must spend a benny. The cleric then draws a single card from the action deck and compares it to the table below. If the card is red, the omen is good and all modifi ers are positive. If the card is black, the signs are bad, and the modifi ers are negative. Players should note that Fate is not biased in favor of their characters—this Edge is as much a curse as a boon.
Auguries affect all Wild Cards in the party who paid a benny and last until the conclusion of the current ad-venture. Only one augury can be in play at any one time. Extras are minor players in life’s play, and the Fates have little of interest in store for them.
AUGURY RESULTS TABLE Card Effect 2-5 The omens are confused or reveal no infor-
mation. No modifi ers apply, but the heroes get their benny back.
6–8 The heroes gain or lose a point of Charisma. 9–10 Each hero has a +1 or –1 modifi er to his high-
est skill die. If two or more skills are equally high, the hero decides which one to augment or lower.
Jack As above, except the modifi er applies to the hero’s highest trait.
Queen The heroes gain or lose a point of Toughness. King The heroes gain a benny (no maximum) or
lose one additional benny (to a minimum of zero) at the start of each session.
Ace The heroes’ Wild Die is one die type higher (max d12+2) or lower. Below a d4, heroes roll no Wild Die.
Joker The omens are particularly strong. Draw another card and double all modifi ers. If another Joker is drawn, draw a third card and treble the effect.
DISCIPLE OF RIGR
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Miracles), Vigor d8+, Faith d8+, Notice d8+, Alertness, follower of Rigr
Devotees of Rigr need only three hours of sleep a night. When denied sleep, they suffer a cumulative –1 penalty to Vigor rolls instead of –2. Even when asleep, a disciple of Rigr still counts as an active guard.
DISCIPLE OF SCAETHA
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mir-acles), Spirit d6+, Faith d8+, Fighting d8+, follower of Scaetha
Priests of the Restful One are renowned for their ha-tred of the undead. The hero, whether priest or paladin, gains the benefi ts of the Champion Edge when fi ght-ing creatures with the Undead monstrous ability. If he already has the Champion Edge, the modifi ers increase to +3. In addition, he has +1 to Faith rolls when casting spells at undead.
DISCIPLE OF SIGEL
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mira-cles), Faith d8+, Notice d8+, follower of Sigel
Clerics of the Burning Eye halve all Darkness pen-alties against heat-producing foes. In addition, they gain +2 to all Notice rolls to detect hidden objects or creatures, including those affected by an invisibility spell. Against foes cloaked in such a manner, they halve penalties to hit them (once they have detected them).
DISCIPLE OF THRYM
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mira-cles), Vigor d8+, Faith d8+, follower of Thrym
Disciples of Thrym are blessed with the ability to work magic more easily, the colder it is. Characters with this Edge use the hrimwisards’ Casting Modifi er Table (p. 55) when casting spells.
DISCIPLE OF THUNOR
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mira-cles), Spirit d8+, Faith d8+, follower of Thunor
The deity blows gently on the hero, which cools him
CHARACTERS
when he is hot and warms him when cold. The cleric has +1 to resist the effects of Heat and Cold. In addition, the god catches the hero if he falls any distance. The hero halves all falling damage.
DISCIPLE OF TIW
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Miracles), Strength d8+, Vigor d8+, Faith d8+, Fighting d10+, follower of Tiw
Tiw’s disciples are the elite of the cult of battle, proven in combat, and with many victories to their name. The character treats his character Rank as being one higher for the purposes of acquiring Combat Edges. He must meet all other requirements as normal.
In addition, he may cast spells and use Fighting in the same round, treating the combined actions as a single action. Thus, a paladin who runs, attacks with his sword, and casts a spell incurs just a –2 multi-action penalty, not –4 as normal.
DISCIPLE OF ULLR
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mir-acles), Faith d8+, Shooting d8+, Stealth d6+, Tracking d6+, Marksman, follower of Ullr
Devotees of Ullr may move half their Pace and still gain the bonus from the Marksman Edge, but only if using a bow (includes long bows, but not crossbows). In addition, they have +2 to Stealth and Tracking in a wilderness environment.
DISCIPLE OF THE UNKNOWABLE ONE
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mir-acles), Agility d8+, Smarts d8+, Faith d6+, Taunt d8+, follower of The Unknowable One
The Cosmic Joker expects his clerics to keep others on their toes through their tricks, but dislikes it when others mock his priesthood. Clerics have +1 to perform Tricks and to Taunt rolls. They also receive +1 to resist Tricks and Taunt rolls made against them.
DISCIPLE OF VALI
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Mira-cles), Vigor d6+, Faith d8+, follower of Vali
The hero is immune to all forms of disease and poison, whether magical or mundane. He may still infect others with diseases he carries, but he suffers no ill effects.
DISCIPLE OF VAR
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Miracles), Faith d8+, Persuasion d8+, Streetwise d8+, follower of Var
Disciples of Var are master merchants, always able to fi nd buyers for their wares. When selling treasure, a suc-cessful Streetwise roll means the cleric can sell the good
for half their regular price, 75% with a raise. The roll may be attempted every four days instead of every week. They also have +1 Charisma.
LEADERSHIP EDGES
Several of these new Edges are designed for use
in Mass Battles. Characters with these Edges can be expected to serve as generals, not junior offi cers. An army can only benefi t from one Edge of the same name.
A FEW GOOD MEN
Requirements: Heroic, Smarts d8+, Knowledge (Battle) d10+, Command, Inspire
This Edge is used only for Mass Battles. The character knows how to get the best from the troops at his disposal.
Once the tokens for each force have been calculated, the character adds one token to his army’s total to ac-count for their status.
COMMAND PRESENCE
Requirements: Novice, Command The hero may be charismatic or just have a loud voice,
but whatever the reason, he can hold his men together over a larger distance than normal.
A hero with this Edge has a “command radius” of 10” instead of the usual 5”.
COORDINATED FIREPOWER
Requirements: Veteran, Smarts d6+, Shooting d8+, Throwing d8+, Command
The hero knows how to coordinate missile fi re against a single foe.
Instead of fi ring separately, all missile troops within the hero’s command radius yet to act in the round can fi re as a single unit on the hero’s action (this counts as their entire action for the round).
The hero nominates one foe within range of his weap-on. He then makes a single Shooting or Throwing roll, as appropriate for his weapon. Each additional missile soldier within the hero’s command radius (and within range of the target), fi ring at the same time adds a fl at +2 to the attack roll.
Damage is calculated as normal for the hero’s weapon, but he adds +1d6 per raise (not just for the fi rst raise). Coordinating fi re in this manner counts as a single ac-tion.
A hero cannot use Double Shot or Giant Killer in conjunction with this Edge unless all subordinates fi ring with the hero have those Edges as well.
Although the soldiers lose their individual attacks, the combined fi repower gives a better chance of bringing down a large foe (like a dragon), and unlike separate missile fi re, the entire damage roll is applied once against the foe’s Toughness.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
CRY HAVOC!
Requirements: Veteran, Spirit d8+, Knowledge (Battle) d10+, Command, Fervor
This Edge is used only for Mass Battles. The general has an uncanny knack for knowing when to unleash his troops and when to hold back.
Once per battle, during the Battle Roll Phase, the character may declare a charge. He must do this before he or his opponent rolls their Battle die. If the character succeeds in his roll and beats his opponent, his enemy loses one extra token.
DEATH BEFORE DISHONOR
Requirements: Veteran, Spirit d8+, Knowledge (Battle) d8+, Command, Hold the Line
This Edge is used only for Mass Battles. The character has led his army to many victories, and the men have come to accept retreat as a stain on their honor.
The character gains +2 to Spirit rolls when rolling for Morale in a Mass Battle.
FANATICISM
Requirements: Seasoned, Command, Fervor Some leaders can inspire their men to follow them
into the depths of the Hellfrost itself. Troops under command of a character with this Edge
add +2 to their Guts rolls and subtract 2 from rolls on the Fright Table.
SIEGE BREAKER
Requirements: Seasoned, Smarts d8+, Knowledge (Battle) d8+
This Edge is used only for Mass Battles. The hero has a good knowledge of siege warfare and can spot weak-nesses in enemy fortifi cations.
When he leads the army, the character reduces the Siege Bonus of any fortifi cation his men are attacking by 1 (to a minimum of zero).
If he makes a Knowledge (Battle) roll at the start of a siege, he can increase the Siege Bonus penalty by an additional –1 for success and –2 with a raise by studying and exploiting specifi c weaknesses.
SIEGE MENTALITY
Requirements: Seasoned, Smarts d8+, Knowledge (Battle) d8+
This Edge is used only for Mass Battles. The character has a strong defensive mentality and understands how to make the most of his fortifi cation and its defenders.
When he leads the army, he increases the Siege Bonus of any fortifi cation he defends by +1. If he makes a Knowl-edge (Battle) roll at the start of a siege, he can increase this bonus by an additional +1 for success and +2 with a raise by studying and better defending weak areas.
TACTICIAN
Requirements: Seasoned, Wild Card, Smarts d8+, Knowledge (Battle) d6+, Command
The hero has a natural grasp of small unit tactics and can instantly take advantage of a rapidly changing situ-ation.
At the beginning of a fi ght, before the GM deals ini-tiative cards, the hero makes a Knowledge (Battle) roll. For each success and raise he receives one initiative card. Deal these cards face down—the player receiving them may look, but the GM and other players cannot. These are kept separate from his regular initiative cards and are not placed back into the deck until used or the combat ends (whichever occurs fi rst).
At the start of any round, the hero may give one or more of these extra cards to an ally, whether Extra or Wild Card, who then uses it as their initiative card for the round in place of the one they were dealt. This does allow Extras to operate independently of Wild Card char-acters for one round if they receive their own card.
Only one character per encounter may use this Edge.
LEGENDARY EDGES
FOLLOWERS
This Edge remains unchanged from the Savage Worlds rules, but requires some clarifi cation for this setting.
In any setting where there is combat, the obvious choice is to take a group of warriors. After all, this gives extra fi repower in fi ghts. However, the GM has the fi nal word on whether a group of Followers is appropriate. Ideally, Followers should be directly related to the hero’s role in some manner and, if possible, expand his poten-tial in the world. Not all Followers need be soldiers and not all need accompany the hero to be useful to him.
For example, a priestess of Eira may gain fi ve assis-tants. None of them have any Arcane Background, but they have Healing and Knowledge (Alchemy) to assist their mistress. A merchant might gain a group of caravan guards, but he could just as easily hire accountants and scribes, thus allowing him to continue earning money from his business ventures while he travels. A thief prob-ably gathers more thieves, perhaps allowing him to start his own guild and become a player in a city’s underworld. Men-at-arms are the obvious choice for a noble, but he could just as easily take a group of courtiers or advisors with plentiful Knowledge skills.
A hero need not take all the same type of Followers when he buys this Edge. A noble could take a steward to watch over his lands in his absence, a herald, and three men-at-arms, for instance.
Unless a hero is a member of an organization, such as the Hearth Knights or Lorekeepers, he may never gain Followers of that type. Followers may never have an Ar-cane Background. A hero who wants that level of power in his retinue should take a Sidekick, instead.
CHARACTERS
The Hellfrost Bestiary includes many varied arche-types ideal for Followers. Other Followers not specifi cally detailed, such as healers or merchants, can be handled using the Citizen archetype and applying two appropri-ate skills at a d6.
SIDEKICK
This Edge remains unchanged from the Savage Worlds rules, but requires some clarifi cation for this setting.
As with the Follower Edge, a Sidekick should be di-rectly related to the hero’s role in some manner.
For instance, a cleric may gain a novitiate priest to serve under him for tutelage or perhaps a paladin as a bodyguard. A mage is likely to take on an apprentice, but may equally attract a scholar to aid his research or bodyguard to ensure he remains safe. A noble or knight might gain a squire, poor in combat skills but good at healing his lord’s wounds and uncovering information for him. Alternately, he could hire a Knight Hrafn to lead his armies in battle. A scholar might take on an appren-tice or a bodyguard, but he may just as easily acquire a thief to help him when exploring ruins, a guide to lead him across country, or a merchant to help him sell goods uncovered during his explorations.
POWER EDGES
ALCHEMY
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Any), arcane skill d6+, Knowledge (Alchemy) d6+
Despite its name, alchemy is not just the creation of potions—it also covers scrolls, one-shot wands, horns, amulets, and other temporary magic objects. The cre-ation of permanent magic items is seemingly beyond current mortal understanding.
Spells to be placed into an alchemical device must be part of the alchemist’s repertoire—if he doesn’t know healing, for instance, he can’t use it with this Edge.
Alchemical devices may only contain spells that do not require an opposed roll to be effective—alchemical devices have no arcane skill. For instance, you could cre-ate a horn of fog cloud, staff of quake, or even chalk of warding, but not a wand of puppet, horn of confusion, or powder of disease.
Players should use common sense when creating al-chemical devices. For instance, bolt makes more sense in a wand rather than an oil. Obscure could be a potion, but would be thrown or sprinkled over an area rather than drunk. The GM has the fi nal say on whether a spell belongs in a potion, scroll, or other object.
Creation: To create an alchemical item (called a de-vice from hereon, for convenience), the alchemist needs access to at least a small lab (such as in an alchemist’s trunk, p. 36), ingredients, and time. Creating a device takes a number of hours equal to twice the spell’s Rank (Novice is 2 hours, Seasoned 4 hours, and so on). The
monetary cost of the ingredients is equal to 50 gs per Rank of the spell.
At the end of the required time, the alchemist pays the monetary costs, and rolls his Knowledge (Alchemy). (Note that to create a triple bolt spell requires three rolls, as each bolt is essentially a unique casting). If a spell al-lows for a negative modifi er for an increased effect, the creator must declare before rolling that he is trying to invoke the additional effect. The Hellfrost effect modifi es this roll as normal. The hero is, in essence, distilling a spell into physical form.
If the skill roll is successful, the device is complete. Any living being can use the device as an action and gains the benefi ts of the spell. A potion of vigor, for example, might contain the boost Vigor spell. On a failure, the device is ruined, the ingredients lost, and the alchemist subjected to backlash.
Effects: The effects of the device are the same as the spell. This includes any additional effects from raises on the original skill roll. Maintained spells in alchemical devices have a duration of one hour and do not count as being Maintained by the creator. Using an alchemical device does not risk backlash.
Ranged Spells: Spells designed to function at range, such as obscure or stun, can be thrown with the Throw-ing skill at Range 3/6/12 (this replaces their usual range) or fi red from a wand using Shooting. Spells with Range brackets (bolt or blast) or which use the Cone Template (burst) must be activated using Shooting.
Scrolls: Any person who can read the scroll can cast the spell as an action. No die roll is required. Once used, the scroll turns to dust.
Other Items: The GM and player must decide how other items are used. A healer’s bag (containing boost Healing), for instance, may only require the user to make a Healing roll under the assumption he is using herbs and poultices from the device to gain the magical bonus. Merely rubbing a brooch of armor may activate the magic, however.
AUGMENT STAFF
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background ( Heah-wisardry), Heahwisardry d8+, Knowledge (Arcana) d8+
A staff is not just a symbol of heahwisardry—it is an extension of the heahwisard himself. By channeling their inner energy, heahwisards can enchant their staves.
When the heahwisard takes this Edge, he must pick one of the abilities listed below. This Edge may be taken once per Rank (or every 20 XP after Legendary), but un-less otherwise stated each ability can be taken only once. These abilities work only for the owner of the staff. * Aura: As a free action, the staff can be made to darken
the shadows around the mage, giving +2 to Intimida-tion rolls, or project an aura of calm, granting +2 to Persuasion.
* Damage: The staff ’s damage increases to Str+d6 and has AP 1. This Edge may be taken twice, with the dam-age rising to Str+d8 and AP 2 the second time it is
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
chosen. The usual rules for minimum Strength apply, however.
* Defl ect: The staff can be used to defl ect missiles. Ranged attacks against the mage have a –1 penalty so long as the mage is aware of them and can wield his staff effectively. If the Edge is taken again, the penalty becomes –2. This stacks with Dodge against ranged attacks, but provides no bonus against area effect spells.
* Spell Store: The mage may nominate one spell he already knows to be placed in his staff. The mage can no longer cast the spell himself (so that’s bad news if he is not holding his staff), nor can he ever enhance it by casting it over a longer period. However, the mage gains a +2 bonus to his arcane skill roll when casting the spell (canceling the usual –2 penalty). Any bonus-es from Spell Finesse are retained. This ability may be taken more than once, but a different spell must be chosen each time.
COMBINE SPELLS
Requirements: Heroic, Arcane Background (Any), arcane skill d10+, Knowledge (Arcana) d10+
The character is able to cast two different spells he knows simultaneously (different trappings of the same spell don’t count as different spells).
The mage makes a single arcane skill roll. Spells af-fect the victim in whatever order the caster wishes, and the effects of each are dealt with separately in the same order. The hero doesn’t have to take this Edge for every combination he wants—once he has the Edge, he can pick and choose any two spells he knows with each cast-ing.
Both spells must be cast at the same target. A mage could cast both bolt and fear together at the same foe, for instance, but he could not cast armor on himself and fear at an opponent.
For the purposes of penalties due to multiple Main-tained spells, each power is still counted as a separate spell.
CONCENTRATION
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (Any), Smarts d6+, Spirit d6+, Vigor d6+
The hero knows how to maintain concentration in adverse conditions. He has +2 to resist disruption from any source.
IMPROVED CONCENTRATION
Requirements: Veteran, Concentration As above, except the bonus increases to +4.
ELEMENTAL MASTERY
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background (El-ementalism)
At any time after reaching Seasoned, an elementalist may learn a new element by taking this Edge. It may only be taken once per Rank.(Legendary characters may take the Edge every other time they level, instead).
Unfortunately, the elemental spirits are jealous crea-tures. Each additional element mastered subtracts 1 from all of the mage’s Elementalism rolls. If an earth mage begins to learn the secrets of water, for instance, the earth spirits become offended and distant. A character who knows two elements suffers a –1 penalty, and one who knows three, suffers a –2 penalty.
Spells that may be learned by multiple schools, such as elemental form, are automatically known for all schools. If a water mage learns air magic, for example, he can now use the elemental form spell for both elements without having to relearn the spell. A mage knowing a spell like bolt, has different trappings in different schools, and must state the trapping being used when he casts.
Arkhwisard: An arkhwisard is an elementalist who has mastered all four elements. Arkhwisards are in tune
CHARACTERS
with all four elements, keeping them in balance, and so suffer no penalties to their Elementalism rolls.
FOCUS
Requirements: Seasoned, Arcane Background ( Any), Spirit d6+, arcane skill d8+
Wielding arcane power has its drawbacks, but some people learn to keep their focus even when things don't go right.
If a character with this Edge is Shaken as a result of failing to invoke a spell or by a result on the Siphoning Table, he gets an immediate Spirit roll at –2 to recover.
IMPROVED FOCUS
Requirements: Heroic, Focus As above, except the roll does not incur the –2 pen-
alty.
HELLFREEZE
Requirements: Veteran, Arcane Background (Any that allows cold, coldfi re, or ice trappings), arcane skill d10+, Knowledge (Arcana) d10+
The character’s damaging spells with a cold, cold-fi re, or ice trapping are far colder than normal. They cause normal damage against creatures with Resistance (Cold) and half damage against creatures with Immunity (Cold).
Damage against creatures with Susceptible (Cold) is doubled (instead of granting a fl at +4 bonus), and against creatures with Weakness (Cold) double the dam-age as normal and then add an extra +4 to the total.
RUNIC INSIGHT
Requirements: Novice, Arcane Background ( Rune Magic), Knowledge (Arcana) d8+, specifi c rune skill d8+
The hero is particularly adept with one rune in which he has at least a d8 skill.
When casting any of the three spells associated with the rune, he gains +1 to his arcane skill die. This Edge may be taken once per Rank (every 20 XPs after Legend-ary), but must be applied to a different rune each time it is taken.
SPELL FINESSE
Requirements: Novice, Arcane Background (Any ex-cept Rune Magic), arcane skill d8+, Knowledge (Arcana) d8+
The hero is particularly adept with one spell. This Edge may be chosen once per advancement. Each
time he picks this Edge he may pick one of the options below and apply it to one spell he knows. Each option may only be picked once per individual spell, but the same option can be applied to different spells and differ-
ent options can be given to the same spell. For instance, a mage can take an increased Wild Die and AP 2 for his bolt spell, but he cannot take AP 2 twice. * Arcane: The hero increases his arcane skill Wild Die
by one die type when casting the spell. * Armor Penetration: A damaging spell has AP 2. This
counts against Armor provided by Arcane Resistance and stacks with any other similar bonus, such as an acid trapping.
* Heavy Weapon: A damaging spell counts as a Heavy Weapon. It does not gain any AP value.
* Range: The hero treats his relevant attribute as one step higher for the purpose of determining the spell’s Range. Fixed range spells (such as bolt) have their range increased by 2/4/8. Touch and Self spells are unaffected by this ability.
* Selective: When casting a spell with a template ef-fect, the caster decides who is and isn’t affected, to a maximum of half his arcane skill die. For instance, a mage with an arcane skill of d8 can drop a blast over a group of allies and foes and cause no damage to four of his comrades.
PROFESSIONAL EDGES
Characters who take a Professional Edge marked “*”
during character generation automatically gain the Con-nections Edge with respect to the specifi c organization to which they belong. This represents access to the organi-zation’s infrastructure, as well as friends and colleagues. This does not count toward starting Edge limits.
In return, the hero also gains the Orders Hindrance with regard to the organization. This does not count toward his starting Hindrance limits, nor does he earn any points during character generation for it. Answering to more than one master can lead to confl icts of interest, which are left to the GM to devise.
Heroes who join an organization marked “*” after play begins must earn their Connections (by taking the Edge with an advancement). They gain the Order Hindrance immediately, however.
BLADEDANCER
Requirements: Novice, Hearth or Taiga Elf, Agility d8+, Fighting d8+, Two-Fisted
Bladedancers are elite elven warriors, normally as-signed to guard important nobles or priests. This Edge is their trademark combat maneuver. Despite the name, they may use weapons.
When used, an elf spins and dances about, attacking every opponent in his path like a deadly cyclone. On the tabletop, the character makes a running roll and must move that many inches. He may not double back.
Every target adjacent to the fi ghter’s path, starting with his initial position, is attacked at –2. One small downside to this Edge is that every adjacent target must be attacked—whether friend or foe. Individual targets may only be attacked once while using this Edge.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
BLUDGEONER*
Requirements: Novice, Engro, Spirit d8+, Strength d6+, Intimidation d6+, Shooting d8+
Bludgeoners are engro militia and make great use of slings, a cheap yet effi cient weapon.
Bludgeoners increase the range of a sling by their character Rank (Novice being 1, Seasoned 2, and so on). So at Seasoned, for instance, the bludgeoner’s sling has a range of 6/12/24. In addition, their slings infl ict Str+d6 damage at Short range.
Because of their reputation as a community police force, they also receive +1 to Charisma when dealing with engros.
GRAY LEGIONARY*
Requirements: Novice, Spirit d8+, Fighting d8+, Shooting or Throwing d6+, cannot have any family or responsibilities outside the Legion
The Gray Legion mercenary company (p. 116) is the last refuge for those who have nothing to look forward to but death. Although not suicidal, they happily lay down their lives for a noble cause, knowing their deaths will make a difference.
Gray Legionaries do not fear death and are immune to Intimidation and Fear.
While a Gray legionary may have other Connections, but only to represent contacts. He may never join an-other organization. Likewise, the only Orders Hindrance he may take is the one he gains for this Edge. He may be beholden to no one person, whether with or without the Edge (so he can’t accept a noble title as a reward if that title forces him to maintain a village, for instance).
GUILD THIEF*
Requirements: Novice, Thief, must know Finger-speak
The various thieves’ guilds range from informal groups with a handful of members to strict hierarchical societies with hundreds of thieves. In return for a cut of their profi ts, typically 10%, the thief has access to a safehouse, fence, and training facilities.
A Guild Thief gets +2 to Streetwise rolls within his home country, which he must specify when he takes this Edge. Extensive training and frequent practice gives the thief a d8 Wild Die with Climbing, Lockpicking, or Stealth (the latter in an urban environment only). The hero picks one skill when he takes this Edge and cannot change it later.
HEARTH KNIGHT*
Requirements: Novice, Spirit d8+, Vigor d8+, Fight-ing d6+, Riding d6+, Survival d8+
The Hearth Knights (p. 116) are a knightly order sworn to keep the Hearthlands as safe as possible for travelers and to guard the realms from Hellfrost beasts.
The Knights comprise three sub-orders, known as the Shield, Sword, and Lance. All characters begin as Shield Knights, common members of the order.
Knights are trained to fi ght the Hellfrost inhabitants and have +1 Parry and +2 to attack rolls when making Called Shots when fi ghting monsters with Immunity (Cold) or Resistance (Cold). They also have +2 to Sur-vival when the temperature is below freezing.
HEDGE MAGIC
Requirements: Novice, Smarts d8+, Knowledge (Al-chemy) d6+, Survival d6+
The study, preparation, and use of herbal remedies dates back to long before the Blizzard War. The hero knows how to identify specifi c plants and brew them into herbal remedies. See Chapter 3 ( Hedge Magic p. 45) for more details.
HOLY/UNHOLY WARRIOR
Requirements: Novice, Arcane Background (Mira-cles), Spirit d8+, Faith d6+
Priests (but not paladins) are frequently tasked with battling the forces of evil in the mortal world. This Edge gives them a slight advantage against such foes.
By taking no other actions in a round, including movement, a priest may call upon his chosen deity to re-pulse supernaturally evil creatures, such as the undead, demons, and the like. It also works on evil characters with the Arcane Background (Miracles) Edge. Most natu-ral beasts, which includes griffi ns and the like, aren’t evil or supernatural in Rassilon.
Repulsing evil has a range of the character’s Spirit in inches. The hero picks one creature within that range, which must make a Spirit roll opposed by the character’s Faith. Those that fail are Shaken. Those who roll a 1 are destroyed. If they are Wild Cards, they suffer an automatic Wound instead. The hero may affect all such creatures in range by taking a –2 penalty to his Faith roll.
If the hero fails on the Faith die, regardless of the Wild Die, he is Shaken. Should the hero ever roll a 1 on his Faith die, regardless of his Wild Die, he suffers a level of Fatigue, as well. This can lead to Incapacitation, but never Death. Fatigue recovers at the rate of one level per 30 minutes.
A character may also be an Unholy Warrior working for the forces of evil. In this case, he repulses good crea-tures, such as heralds, paladins, or priests.
IRON GUILD MERCENARY*
Requirements: Novice, Strength d8+, Spirit d6+, Fighting d6+
The character is in the employ of the Iron Guild, a large mercenary outfi t specializing in protecting mer-chant caravans. Members are trained to work with others in close combat, ensuring any fi ght in which they partake is over with quickly and effi ciently, thus limiting the risk of damage to the caravans they protect.
CHARACTERS
The hero gains an extra +1 bonus when Ganging Up, increasing the maximum bonus to +5 for the character only. The hero must be eligible for a Gang Up bonus to claim this benefi t.
The hero also begins play with a chain shirt, long sword, and medium shield, paid for by the Guild. These must be returned if the hero ever leaves the organization. If a hero loses an item, he must pay for a replacement from his own funds.
KNIGHT HRAFN*
Requirements: Novice, Smarts d6+, Spirit d6+, Knowledge (Battle) d8+, Command, one other Leader-ship Edge
The Knights Hrafn (p. 118) is a small order of tac-ticians and strategists. They care little for chivalry or honor, dedicating themselves instead to excellence in leadership and military victories. The Order does not maintain its own army, and members are forbidden from being served by more than fi ve men under their personal, permanent command. Instead, they hire themselves as mercenaries to nobles.
The character gains +1” to his “command radius” per character Rank, starting at Novice. He has +1 to all Knowledge (Battle) rolls. In addition, he may ignore the Rank requirements when taking Leadership Edges.
LOREKEEPER*
Requirements: Novice, Smarts d8+, Investigation d6+, cannot be Illiterate
Lorekeepers (p. 118) are dedicated to fi nding and preserving knowledge of times before the Blizzard War. Having learned not to put all their eggs in one basket, individual Lorekeepers are given custody of a small scroll collection, which they must protect. These scrolls weigh 5 pounds and come with waterproof cases. All benefi ts of this Edge are lost if the scrolls are destroyed or otherwise inaccessible. Lost scrolls can be replaced for free at any center of learning.
If the Lorekeeper spends an entire round checking his scrolls (no other actions allowed, including movement), any roll for an unskilled Smarts-based skill (except arcane skills) he makes in the next round is made at a d4 instead of the usual d4–2. Knowledge skills, which cannot be used unskilled, may be attempted by an adventurer with this Edge, but the character rolls a d4–2 as normal (and has to spend a round reading his scrolls).
RELIQUARY (ARCANOLOGIST)*
Requirements: Novice, Smarts d8+, Knowledge (Ar-cana) d8+, Notice d6+
Members of the Reliquary (p. 119), arcanologists are scholars dedicated to searching out the hiding places of relics. Often their work means long months, even years, of painstaking research, but a few are allowed to travel Rassilon in search of clues.
They have neither interest in alchemical works (so called “fi nite items” in Reliquary terms because they are one-shot devices), nor in the staves of heahwisards, which they view as an extension of the mage rather than unique “magic items.”
Members learn the secrets of how to analyze the magi-cal energy fi elds radiating from relics. With a successful Knowledge (Arcana) roll made while touching a relic, the hero learns its powers without having to attune himself. On a failure, he cannot try to identify that item for 24 hours. In addition, they have +2 to Common Knowledge and Knowledge rolls regarding relics (such as Folklore or History).
RELIQUARY (RELIQUS)*
Requirements: Novice, Agility d8+, Lockpicking d6+, Notice d6+
The Reliquae (p. 119) are charged with retrieving relics, and information pertaining to relics. While some-times this means breaking into a noble’s castle, more
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
often than not it means an expedition into a long-forgot-ten, trap-fi lled tomb.
The hero gains +2 to Notice when searching for traps (and hidden doors) and +2 to rolls to disarm them. A character with this Edge is never Surprised by a trap, though he can still be surprised by ambushes and such like. Whenever the character activates a trap (not his comrades), he may make an Agility roll at –2 as a free action to avoid the effect. The trap may not interrupt un-less the Agility roll is failed.
ROADWARDEN*
Requirements: Novice, Vigor d6+, Fighting d8+, Riding d6+, Survival d6+, Tracking d6+
The hero is a member of the Roadwardens (p. 119), an organization dedicated to ensuring the highways and trails of the Hearthlands are free of bandits, protecting innocents, and maintaining the travel tower network.
A Roadwarden gets +2 to all Survival and Tracking rolls. In addition, he gets +2 to Notice rolls to detect ambushes, traps, concealed weapons, and such like. He gains no bonus to detect traps in an urban environment (including temples, dungeons, ruins, and the like).
SISTER OF MERCY*
Requirements: Novice, Healing d8+, must be fe-male, must have a Pacifi st Hindrance
The Sisterhood (p. 119) is dedicated to helping the sick and injured of the civilized races. The Sisters never charge for their services (except for healing potions which are to be used at a later date), but patients are re-quired to perform a favor for the Sisterhood in return.
Sisters gain +2 to Healing rolls and +1 Charisma. The Sister may take the Sidekick Edge (with an advance as normal) on reaching Veteran. This represents a member of the Swords of Necessity, warriors healed by the Sisters and now devoted to protecting them on their travels.
A Sister who earns enough Glory to acquire a Sidekick may pick a Sword of Necessity, but is not required to do
so. She could just as easily take a Novice Sister under her wing.
WOOD WARDEN*
Requirements: Novice, Shooting d8+, Arcane Back-ground ( Druidism) or Woodsman Edge
Wardens (p. 120) are an organization loyal to the Shining King, lord of the hearth elves, and dedicated to protecting the deep forests.
Members are taught ancient elven magic, and can talk with mundane beasts (like bears, birds, and rabbits). Such beasts are typically used as spies and messengers, though they are not automatically friendly to the user (roll on the Reaction Table as normal).
In addition, they are taught the beast friend power. Non-druids use their Smarts die as their arcane skill, even if they have an Arcane Background which allows this spell. Spellcasters of other types may use their regu-lar arcane skill only if they learn beast friend separately through the New Power Edge.
Druids learn the spell as if they had taken the New Power Edge, and receive a +2 bonus to their Druidism rolls when invoking the spell.
SOCIAL EDGES
MASTER STORYTELLER
Requirements: Seasoned, Smarts d8+, Knowledge (Folklore) d8+, Persuasion d8+
Tales of brave heroes and epic battles are told across Rassilon in taverns and around hearths and campfi res. Most master storytellers are skalds.
When using the Variable Glory Awards rules (p. 100), the characters roll d8s instead of a d6s if this hero re-counts their deeds.
In addition, the storyteller is adept at defl ecting bad press through carefully chosen words. The party suffers no penalties to Glory if the storyteller rolls a critical fail-ure, treating it as a regular failure.
LEGENDARY STORYTELLER
Requirements: Heroic, Master Storyteller The party gains +1d8 Glory for each raise after the
fi rst when using the Variable Glory Awards.
WILD CARD EDGES
POWER SURGE
Requirements: Wild Card, Seasoned, Arcane Back-ground (Any), arcane skill d10+
The character doubles his total damage when mak-ing a successful arcane skill attack this round. This Edge replaces the standard Power Surge Edge.
THE RELIQUARY
The Reliquary is discussed in more detail on page 119. For now, it need only be known that there are three divisions. The Arcanologists are the scholars, the Reliquae are responsible for actually retrieving relics from their ancient resting places (or current owners), and the Guardians of the Arcane protect relics once they have been returned to the Reli-quary’s headquarters, the Citadel. Guardians of the Arcane are simply fi ghters. Taking the Orders ( Reliquary) Hindrance by itself is enough to earn membership. Players should note that the Guardians only usually travel when protecting an Arcanologist or Reliqus. If there aren’t any of these in the group, the GM shouldn’t allow a Guardian character.
Now that you’ve made your character, it’s time to out-fi t him with arms, armor, and other gear. Below is a list of the most commonly sought-after goods and services, as well as armor and weaponry.
Unless altered by Edges or Hindrances, your hero has 500 gold scields to purchase equipment with. Some of the items for sale are quite expensive because they are rare or on the cutting edge. Technology in Rassilon is primarily that of a medieval world.
CURRENCY
Though all the old races once minted their own coins, the only currency used today are small, shield-shaped coins known as “scields,” fi rst introduced in Drakeport some 50 years after the Blizzard War. The coins come in gold (gs) and silver (ss), with 10 silvers being worth one gold. Unless otherwise listed, all prices are in gold scields.
AVAILABILITY
Having a sack of money does not guarantee one
can purchase goods anywhere in Rassilon. Many steads and villages are self-sufficient in basic goods, but lack the materials, craftsmen, and desire to pro-duce certain goods. In a major city, on the other hand, one is likely to be able to find all but the rar-est items.
Most goods are rated Village (which also covers steads), Town, or City. On the various tables, these are coded as V, T, and C respectively. This is the minimum size settlement in which one can fi nd these goods read-ily for sale. Special (S) refers to specifi c types of settle-ment, such as only being able to purchase blessed armor through a temple.
During character generation, heroes may ignore these codes—it’s assumed they’ve managed to acquire the goods through brave deeds, journeys, lucky fi nds, family heirlooms, and such like.
RACIAL & GEOGRAPHIC FACTORS
As well as the size of the settlement, there are also racial factors in play. Rather than presenting a detailed list of differences, core examples are provided for the players. As always, the GM has the fi nal word on what can be purchased where and for how much.
The Saxa and elves, for instance, never mastered, or never saw the need to master, the art of crafting plate armor. Both prefer to fi ght in lighter armor, typically employing skirmishers rather than shock troops or heavy cavalry. As such, plate mail costs twice as much when purchased in Saxa or elven lands. The Anari, on the other hand, favor heavy armor among their infan-try.
The Finnar, who lead a nomadic life, have no forges, and thus never produce metal armor or weapons. Such items are simply not available in their small camps. Like-wise, metal weapons cost fi ve times as much, since they must be imported into the frozen north at great expense and risk to merchants.
The Saxa favor axes as their main weapon, consider-ing swords to be weapons of the nobility. As such, axes cost 75% the normal price in Saxa lands, but swords cost 50% more.
While dwarves are master metalworkers, their innate intolerance of the other races prohibits open and easy trade. When they do sell their arms and armor, they do so at twice the usual cost.
Items like furs and winter clothing are easily acquired among the Finnar. Because of their laws of hospitality, and having no wish to pollute their homelands with fro-zen corpses, they sell protective winter garments at 75% of the normal cost, and such goods are always available for sale. In the Hearthlands, by comparison, the grow-ing demand for clothing causes shortages during harsh winters.
No honest merchant would ever sell arms and armor to an orc, goblin, or other such creature. These beasts are the enemies of all the civilized races.
GEAR
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
BUYING GOODS
The availability codes are general indicators for the GM to show what goods and services are available in a given settlement. Small settlements may lack the crafts-men, raw materials, or market for certain items. Of course, if there is a craftsman of the appropriate sort, they’ll likely be able to make items—if one has the money and is prepared to wait.
City items in a town or town items in a village cost 50% more than normal, when they are available. City items in a village cost twice as much as normal, if avail-able. Special goods can only very rarely be purchased outside the described location.
SELLING GOODS
Adventurers often come into a fair amount of trea-sure. Gems and jewelry are easy enough to sell or trade, but unloading more mundane items such as swords, armor, and even ships can be a bit trickier. One or two
items can sometimes be sold at near full-price if the right buyer can be found, but no merchant pays full price for such items.
A Streetwise roll in any settlement allows a seller to unload all of his mundane treasure for a quarter its nor-mal value. A raise fi nds a buyer who will take it all for half the list price. This roll may only be attempted once per week per settlement.
SPECIAL MATERIALS
Certain materials provide objects with seemingly
magical powers. Such items, while available for sale, are rarer than hen’s teeth, hence their high price. Availability is left to the GM to determine.
BLACK ICE
Found only deep within ancient glaciers or in the bit-ter wastelands of the Hellfrost, black ice can be worked like metal, though only over a coldfi re forge (it melts
GEAR
when exposed to normal fl ames). It can be used to cre-ate armor and weapons, as well as mundane items like grappling hooks, nails, plows, and tools.
Black ice chain or plate armor weighs the same as reg-ular metal armor and provides the same Armor bonus. It also grants the wearer +2 additional Armor against cold or ice attacks (including coldfi re), whether natural or magical in origin. The wearer has +2 to Vigor rolls to resist the effects of cold weather.
Edged black ice weapons increase their damage die one step (so a dagger would be Str+d6, a long sword Str+d10, and so on), but without affecting the Strength required to use them. Simply calculate the hero’s dam-age with the weapon based on his Strength as normal, and then increase the weapon die by one step. Blunt weapons gain no bonus. A character with Strength d4, for instance, would cause d4+d6 damage with a black ice dagger. If he had a long spear instead, he would also cause d4+d6 damage, but would gain none of the other bonuses associated with using the spear.
Black ice items cost 10 times as much as normal items and are rated Special—they can only be purchased with the GM’s permission.
Melting: Black ice is highly susceptible to heat and rapidly melts at temperatures above freezing.
Heat & Fire Attacks: Black ice subjected to a heat or fi re based attack loses +1 Armor or damage die for each wound the wearer takes, completely melting when the protection or damage die reaches zero. For instance, a fi re-trapping blast spell that infl icts 2 wounds would completely melt black ice chain armor (+2 Armor) and permanently reduce a black ice long sword from Str+d10 to Str+d6.
Black ice weapons and armor that begin melting can-not be repaired. If a long sword is reduced to Str+d6, it will always cause that damage.
MAERATHRIL
Dwarven for “Maera’s metal,” though most often translated as “moon metal,” Maerathril is a white metal, exceptionally light, and with anti-magic properties. It can be worked over regular or coldfi re forges.
Maerathril chain shirts, chain hauberks, and plate corselets bestow the benefi ts of the Arcane Resistance Edge on the wearer. Should the wearer already have this Edge or the Improved version, the benefi ts stack (granting a possible +6 bonus in total). Unfortunately, wizards of any sort (but not clerics) who wear Maerathril armor suffer a –2 penalty to their arcane skill roll, as the metal interferes with the fl ow of magic. Maerathril armor weighs half as much as regular armor.
Maerathril weapons, on the other hand, automatically “cast” dispel every time they strike a foe with a spell cast on him. The attack need not cause any damage for this effect to occur and thus can be used with a Touch Attack. The arcane skill of the weapon is equivalent to its full damage die (so d4 for a dagger, d10 for a great sword, and so on). Maerathril weapons have –2 to their dispel
roll when affecting miraculous powers. All active powers are affected. Only a single arcane skill roll is made by the weapon and the target.
Maerathril items cost 100 times as much as normal items and are rated Special—they can only be purchased with the GM’s permission.
STAR METAL
On rare occasions a star falls to earth, leaving behind a smoldering core of star metal. Star metal is worked like normal metal (even over coldfi re). It is exceptionally strong and good at punching through material.
Chain armor, plate armor, or helmets made of star metal have an additional +2 Armor Protection and weigh the same as regular armor. Armor does not have to be a whole suit. Thus one can fi nd star metal chain leggings and plate bracers.
Star metal weapons are capable of cutting or smash-ing through hardened materials. Such weapons have AP 2. Weapons which already have an AP rating have it increased by +2. Such weapons weigh the same as nor-mal.
Tools or mundane items, on which star metal is rarely wasted, have +3 Object Toughness.
Star metal items cost 50 times as much as normal items and are rated Special—they can only be purchased with the GM’s permission.
GEAR NOTES
Below are some notes on the gear in this chapter. If an item is not listed, it has no special rules associated with it and its use should be obvious.
ARMOR
Blessed Armor: Divine armor is available only to he-
roes with the Arcane Background (Miracles) Edge who have chosen to be paladins. The cost refl ects a donation to the temple. Should another try to wear the suit, it acts as regular plate mail, including the increased weight. Such armor is only available at a temple to the appropri-ate deity.
Blessed Robes: These blessed robes are available only to heroes with the Arcane Background (Miracles) Edge who have chosen to be priests. Others may wear them, but gain no armor bonus. Such armor is only avail-able at a temple to the appropriate deity.
Barding: Those who invest the money—and more importantly time—in training a horse, pygmy mammoth, or war dog want to protect their companions. Barding protects the animal’s head and torso.
Chain: Chain mail consists of thousands of interwo-ven iron links. Many adventurers wear only the shirt, but stronger types can handle the extra weight on their legs as well.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
Hide: Hide armor is thicker than regular leather, be-ing insulated, but also restricts movement. The wearer has +2 to Vigor rolls to resist the effects of Cold, but suffers a –1 penalty to Pace and all Agility and Agility-linked skill rolls.
Leather: Leather armor is soft and supple at the joints for maximum fl exibility, with boiled “plates” attached to the forearms, chest, and upper legs.
Leather Vest: A stiff leather jerkin worn to protect the torso and arms.
Plate: The heaviest armor is plate mail, but it also provides the most protection. The breastplate, bracers, and leggings are all made of tempered steel, providing excellent protection against most all hand weapons.
Plate mail must be customized to fi t a particular per-son. This requires an hour of time and a Repair roll. If non-tailored armor is worn, the user suffers a –1 penalty to all his physical trait tests.
Scale: Cheaper than chain yet more cumbersome, scale comprises metal plates riveted onto a stiff leather backing.
Shields: For clarifi cation, shields provide their Armor bonus against area effect attacks, whether magical (like blast) or mundane (like a dragon’s breath).
ARMOR & WATER
Armor is particularly dangerous in water. Subtract your armor’s bonus from all Swimming rolls. This is in
addition to any penalties from the armor’s weight. Ig-nore magical bonuses, considering only the bonus of a basic suit of that type. A suit of leather, for example, adds +2 to the user’s Toughness, and so subtracts –2 from his Swimming rolls.
DONNING ARMOR
Leather armor typically takes 1d6 minutes to properly fi t. Chain or scale takes 2d6 minutes. Plate mail requires 2d6 x 5 minutes to properly attach.
DISCARDING ARMOR
Discarding armor requires a number of rounds equal to twice the highest piece of armor’s bonus. Discarding plate mail, for example, takes six full rounds.
Adventurers who fall into deep water must make a Swimming roll minus the armor’s bonus as well at the end of the last round or continue trying until success-ful.
MELEE WEAPONS
Lance: The Strength die for a lance is based on the
mount’s Strength if the Charge maneuver is used. When mounted, use the d8 damage die regardless of the user’s own Strength because of the way lances are held. Only if used on foot does the Minium Strength rule apply.
PRIMITIVE WEAPONS
Primitive weapons are made of bone, wood, and
sinew, rather than wood and metal. As such, they can be easily crafted in the wilds, but lack the strength and resilience of forged weapons. The listed cost is for a pre-made item in a civilized region, and is a “novelty” price.
Antler Staff: This strange looking weapon is nothing more than a standard staff with stag antlers attached to one end. The splayed prongs provide a bonus to Parry, and give the attacker a +1 bonus when using the weapon to Disarm.
In addition, attackers ignore one point of Gang Up bonus because of the width of the prongs.
Bear Claw: Used primarily by the Vendahl and a few Finnar tribes, a bear claw is made from an actual bear’s forepaw. The claws are left attached to the skin and sharpened. The forearm part is reinforced with thick hide, which allows the wearer to parry blows.
The wearer also gets +1 Climbing, but cannot use the hand to pick up or hold other objects, including shields, while the glove is worn.
The glove still aids parrying even if the claws break, though the restriction on holding objects still applies.
Price, weight, and Climbing bonuses are for a single glove. Climbing bonuses stack if a hero wears two bear claws, but Parry bonuses do not.
A character wearing a bear claw cannot be Disarmed, nor does he ever count as an Unarmed Defender.
SOCIAL STATUS & WEAPONS
Spears are cheaper than short swords and do the same damage. Long spears have the added benefi ts of greater Reach and a Parry bonus, all of which is offset by requiring two hands and a slight weight increase. So why doesn’t everybody carry spears? Well, in truth most people do. Spears are the com-mon weapon of militias and town guards, as well as skalds, mages, farmers, hunters, and other lesser combatants. Swords are the weapons of nobles and warriors (and axes for the latter as well). While a player character might prefer a spear be-cause of its bonuses and cheap cost, he must also be prepared to be treated as a commoner, not a true hero. Likewise, a hero may freely carry a sword or axe, but he will be expected to act like a noble or warrior by those he meets and know how to wield the weapon effectively. There are no game mechanics for this—the GM should roleplay NPCs’ reactions to a hero based around his weapons as much as his clothes or de-meanor. A sword-carrying farmer may be called “Lord” by an innkeeper out of mistaken respect for a noble title, whereas a spear carrying warrior who boasts of his prowess might be treated as being just another patron who thinks he’s somebody of im-portance.
GEAR
Toothpick, Double: Found only among northern bar-barian tribes and foul creatures like orcs and goblins, the toothpick is a wooden haft to which two saber-toothed tiger teeth are attached. This version has the teeth placed at 180 degrees, allowing the user to reverse the weapon should one tooth break.
On a roll of 1, only one tooth breaks, meaning the weapon can still be used effectively by reversing it.
Toothpick, Twin: Aside from having both teeth at-tached to the same end, this weapon is identical to the one above. While the weapon infl icts more damage, a roll of 1 on the Fighting die means both teeth are broken.
MAKING
Creating a primitive weapon requires the constitu-ent parts, an hour, and a Survival roll. On a success, the weapon is ready to use. With failure, the crafter can try again, though it takes another hour. On a critical failure, a key component has been broken and must be replaced.
BREAKING
On a roll of 1 on the Fighting die when using a primi-tive weapon, regardless of Wild Die, the weapon breaks and is useless unless otherwise stated. Calculate any damage if the Wild Die indicated a success fi rst.
RANGED WEAPONS
Arrow, Armor Piercing: Armor piercing arrows have
a narrow head, designed to punch through armor. They have AP 2.
Arrow, Fleshripper: These wickedly barbed arrows cause +2 damage, but double the protection of any ar-mor the target is wearing (or natural armor).
Arrow, Signal: Invented by the elves, these arrows have now come into standard use. They produce a high-pitched whistle when fi red, which can be heard at a dis-tance of 100” (200 yards).
SIEGE WEAPONS
Coldfi re Flamethrower: The coldfi re thrower, some-
times known as a “drake’s mouth,” comprises a metal boiler and a short metal barrel (the “snout”), closed with a heavy iron fl ap. Icewood is placed in the boiler and ig-nited. When it reaches the right pressure, the fi rer opens the fl ap, releasing a stream of burning coldfi re. Throwers have two pressure ratings, one for a Cone Template and the other for extended range (see Vehicular Flamethrow-ers in Savage Worlds).
Each use consumes one pound of icewood. The boiler can hold a maximum of 10 pounds. More icewood can be shoved into the boiler while ignited, though the weapon may not fi re during this time due to the pressure drop. Typically 1 pound of icewood can be added to the boiler each round as an action, though with an Agility roll, the stoker can place 2 pounds with a success and 3
pounds on a raise. Failure indicates the loader fumbled his task—no fuel was added.
Ram: Rams are designed for use against gates, not walls. They are usually heavy logs fi tted with a metal end to prevent splitting. When frames are used, they are normally covered to provide protection for the troops using the device. Commonly, the frame is covered with untreated or wet skins, to prevent fi re arrows from ignit-ing the structure.
Rams can be carried by infantry, requiring four men per yard of length to be effective, or suspended by stout
ropes or chains from a frame, in which case only two men per yard are required.
Siege Tower: Siege towers are protected stairways used only in sieges. The average version is a thin, wood-en structure standing 10 yards high and mounted on a stout, wheeled base. The walls are usually covered in hides and soaked in water to prevent fi re arrows igniting the structure. Only rarely is armor added, as the extra weights makes moving the tower even more diffi cult.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
Inside, a series of ladders link multiple platforms (usually 3 or 4). The front wall of the top level is a hinged bridge fi tted with two hooks at the end, which is lowered onto enemy battlements to allow the troops inside to storm across.
Moving a siege tower is backbreaking work. The low-est level has no fl oor, allowing the laborers (often the troops who will then use it) to move the tower while protected. Orcs routinely use ogres to perform this labor, increasing the speed to Pace 4. Running is impossible while moving a siege tower.
MUNDANE GEAR
Alchemical Device: This is a one-use device contain-
ing a single spell created using the Alchemy Edge. Most such devices are usually potions or scrolls, but may also be small gems (swallowed, crushed or thrown), feathers, powders, oils, and such like.
The hero picks a single spell when he buys an alchem-ical device. Spells requiring some form of targeting roll (like bolt) use either Shooting or Throwing as applicable (see the Alchemy Edge on p. 25). Otherwise, the spell activates with a standard success when used.
Spells are always the most basic variety, with no modi-fi ers applied. For instance, a wand of bolt only fi res a single 2d6 bolt. The only way to gain more effective alchemical devices is for a character to create them.
The cost for a pre-made potion is 100 gs per Rank of the spell.
Alchemist’s Trunk: Alchemists require tools to produce potions and scrolls. This portable laboratory contains a small oil lamp, glass beakers and tubes, distil-lation vases, tweezers, pipettes, and a reference chart of common minerals and herbs.
A character trying to create alchemical devices without a trunk suffers a –2 penalty to his Knowledge (Alchemy) rolls.
Bandolier: A cloth belt with a dozen slots for storing potions, scrolls, or throwing knives for easy access. Can be worn around the waist or slung diagonally across the chest.
Boot Spikes (pair): A character wearing boot spikes treats rough ice as normal terrain and smooth ice as rough ice. He also has +1 to Climbing rolls. Donning or removing spikes takes an action.
Candle: A candle provides clear light in a 2” radius for two hours. A candle blows out in a strong wind or whenever the character holding it runs.
Climbing Gear: Comprises a small hammer/ pick, spikes, and gloves. It does not include rope or boot spikes. It grants +2 to Climbing rolls.
Firewood: Burning fi rewood creates a fi re of 1” di-ameter. A campfi re (uses 1 pound per two hours) raises the temperature by two levels in a Large Burst Template centered on the fi re.
Furs: Furs grant a character +1 to Vigor saves to resist the effects of Cold. The modifi er stacks with winter cloth-ing.
Game Set: The races of the Hearthlands play a variety of boardgames. Chess and fox-and-hounds are the most common, though versions of backgammon and checkers are also played. Each specifi c game requires a different set to be purchased.
Goggles: Goggles double the time period before the hero has to make rolls to avoid snow blindness. Notice rolls involving sight are made at –2 because of the heavy tint.
Grappling Hook and Line: A grappling hook is at-tached to a light line of variable length (but usually no more than 15 yards in length). The user throws the hook just as if he were attacking a target. It has a range of 3/6/12. If it “hits,” the hook has set and can hold up to 200 pounds of weight.
Healer’s Bag: A character who tries to heal someone without a supply of bandages, herbs, salves, and poul-tices suffers a –2 penalty to his roll. This does not affect the healing spell.
Herbal Remedy: Herbal remedies are detailed in Chapter 3 (p. 45). The hero picks one effect from the list. Note that herbal remedies are good for just one week (8 days). After this they grant no effect.
Herbalist’s Kit: Contains a small iron pot, knives, pestle and mortar, and clay storage jars. A character try-ing to brew herbal remedies without a kit suffers a –2 penalty to his Knowledge (Alchemy) rolls.
Herbs, Dried: Dried herbs can be used to make herbal remedies. Using dried herbs gives a –2 penalty to Knowledge (Alchemy) rolls. See page 48 for details.
Icewood: Harvested only from the Frozen Forest, icewood is a rare and valuable form of wood, most often used by dwarves in their forges. When ignited, it burns with a coldfi re fl ame (p. 124). An icewood campfi re (uses 1 pound per two hours) lowers the temperature by two levels in a Large Burst Template centered on the fi re.
Icewood can only be found for sale in the Icedale Freeholds or a dwarven settlement (no one else has much use for it).
Insect Net: In summer, the wetlands of the Hearth-lands buzz with mosquitoes, while towns suffer plagues of fl ies. Insect netting draped over a 1” square, keeps it free of insects.
Lantern: A lantern provides light in a 4” radius for three hours per pint of oil. There is a 50% chance the lantern breaks if dropped, and a 1 in 6 chance it sets normal combustibles alight.
Lantern, Bullseye: A bullseye lantern acts as a regu-lar lantern, but also has a shuttered refl ective hood that can focus light through a small opening. When used in this way, it provides a cone of light equal to the Cone Template. There is a 50% chance the lantern breaks if dropped, as above.
Lockpicks: A character who tries to pick a lock with-out these tools suffers a –2 penalty to his roll.
Musical Instrument: Numbers in parentheses are cost and weight. Instruments include fl utes (50 gs/1 lb), lyres (150 gs/2 lbs), drums (75 gs/3 lbs), bagpipes (250 gs/5 lbs), lutes (200 gs/3 lbs), and small harps (300 gs/6
GEAR
lbs). Playing a musical instrument requires an Agility roll. A –2 penalty applies if the hero has no obvious musical training.
Norn Charm: Norn charms are runes of fate carved onto fl at stones, pieces of bark, and such like. Each charm is a one-shot device and contains 1 benny. The benny can be used exactly as a normal benny.
Oil (1 pint): Besides providing light when used in lanterns, oil can also be used as a weapon. This is most commonly done, by putting oil in a ceramic fl ask with a lit fuse. The fl ask is then thrown at the target where it breaks and the fuse sets the oil alight.
Lighting a fuse requires 1d6 rounds with fl int and steel (1 round with open fl ame), so it’s best to light the fuse before a fi ght starts (a fuse stays alight for 10 minutes).
The fl ask’s range is 3/6/12. Anything it hits is set alight on a d6 roll of 5–6, causing 1d10 damage per round. The fi re has a chance of growing each turn as usual.
Pick: Picks are unbalanced as weapons and so infl ict a –1 penalty on the user’s Parry and Fighting scores. Their damage is Str+d6.
Pigeon, Carrier: Carrier pigeons are used to carry messages to a single location. The weight accounts for a small, wicker cage to house the bird. The pigeon can fl y 100 miles a day.
Rope (10 yards): The rope can safely handle 300 pounds without worry. For every 50 pounds over that, roll 1d6 every minute or whenever the rope suffers a sudden stress. On a 6, the rope breaks under the strain.
Saddle, War: War saddles are custom made for the user. They grant a +1 bonus to Riding rolls to stay in the saddle.
Salt: A pound of salt sprinkled over a 1” square of ice lowers the thickness by one level (see p. 125). Reduc-ing the ice below very thin results in the ice completely melting.
Sandglass: Primitive timepieces keeping track of the three-hour long “gates” the day is broken up into.
Skates (pair): A hero wearing skates treats smooth ice as normal terrain. He rolls one die type higher (typically a d8) when “running” on smooth ice. On other terrain, the hero has his Pace reduced by half (minimum of 1) due to the diffi culty in walking and cannot run. Donning or removing skates takes an action.
Skis (pair): A character wearing skis treats all snow and ice as normal terrain, but has his Pace halved (mini-mum of 1) and cannot run on other terrain. He rolls an extra d6 when “running” downhill on ice or snow. When moving at Overland Pace, he treats snow as average ter-rain. Donning or removing skis takes an action.
Snowshoes (pair): A character wearing snowshoes treats all snow as normal terrain, but has his Pace re-duced by 1 (to a minimum of 1) and cannot run on other terrain. When moving at overland rates, he treats snow as standard terrain with no path. Donning or removing snowshoes takes an action.
Tailored Clothing: Normally worn by nobles and dig-nitaries, tailored clothing grants the wearer +1 Charisma so long as the clothing is fully visible.
Tent: Tents are treated to resist the cold. When in a tent, heroes have +2 to Vigor rolls to resist the effects of cold. (The heroes are out of the biting wind and body heat soon warms the interior.) Lighting a fi re in a tent is dangerous!
Tome of Learning: This magical book describes the process for casting a single spell determined by the GM. A mage can learn the contents even if he is not of suf-fi cient Rank to actually cast it, but only when he reaches the appropriate Rank can he actually use it. The spell be-ing learned must be available to the Arcane Background (a heahwisard cannot learn regenerate, for instance). Tomes containing runes do not exist.
A mage of the appropriate Arcane Background makes a Smarts roll after 2d6 days of study. With success, the hero adds the spell to his repertoire. The contents are then permanently erased from the book. (This allowed a master to ensure his student had actually learned the spell.) On a failure, he may restudy the tome.
The cost is per Rank of the spell. Tomes of learning are generally available only in cities with temples to Maera or places where mages gather (such as skalds at Scathmoor or the Spire, elementalists at the Imperial City, Drakeport, or Far Reach, druids in the Stone For-est, or any mage school in the Magocracy for heahwisard spells). A large city (20,000+ souls) might have a few for sale as specialist items.
For a randomly discovered book, roll a d20 to deter-mine the Arcane Background of the author.
d20 Arcane Background 1–3 Elementalism (Eir) 4–6 Elementalism ( Ertha) 7–9 Elementalism (Fyr) 10–12 Elementalism (Waeter) 13–17 Heahwisardry 18 Hrimwisardry 19–20 Song Magic Tome of Lore: Tomes of lore are reference books. A
tome grants a bonus to a specifi c Knowledge skill, cho-sen by the player when he buys the book or by the GM if the tome is found during an adventure.
Each tome is rated between +1 (the most common) and +6 (the rarest), and covers a single skill. Modifi ers higher than +3 cannot be purchased without the GM’s permission—they are extremely rare, and exist only in forgotten ruins or concealed in temple vaults. Those who own such tomes rarely sell them.
The table below gives a random method for generat-ing a tome’s bonus—the GM picks the skill.
TOME BONUS TABLE
d20 Bonus 1–10 +1 11–15 +2 16–17 +3 18 +4 19 +5 20 +6
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
For each +1 bonus the hero wants to gain from his tome, he must read the book for an hour (to a maximum of the book’s rating). A hero doesn’t have to take the full bonus if he is in a hurry.
Once he has fi nished reading, the hero may apply the bonus to a single skill roll of the appropriate Knowledge. The bonus is lost when it is used, the reader next sleeps, or 24 hours pass, whichever comes fi rst.
The listed cost is per +1 bonus the book imparts. The
price rises dramatically for books with a +4 or higher bonus. Weight is 1 pound per +1 bonus.
Tomes of lore are generally available only in cities with temples to Hoenir, god of knowledge, or places where the Lorekeepers have a strong presence. A large city (20,000+ souls) might have a few for sale as special-ist items.
Torch (2 hours): A torch provides clear light in a 4” radius. Properly prepared torches last for two hours. Temporary torches can be made with some wood, rags,
and 1 pint of oil for every 10 torches. These last half as long, however, and produce more smoke than those cre-ated with care.
Trained Animal: The beast is trained to respond to basic commands appropriate to its use. Only war dogs, war horses, and pygmy mammoths are trained for war.
Whale Blubber: This greasy substance is smeared over skin to provide insulation against the cold. Each pound provides +1 to Vigor rolls to resist the effects of cold weather for 4 hours. Only one dose can be applied at any one time.
Winter clothing: Characters with warm cloaks, woolen undergarments, and fur boots and gloves are +2 to their Vigor rolls to resist cold weather.
VEHICLES
Although the hearth races make use of regular wag-ons and ships (for sea and river voyages), the races of the Hellfrost also make use of vehicles to get around the ice and snow plains.
Crew: The listed crew for ships is when operating under full oar. When using the sails, only one-fi fth of the listed crew is required to operate the vessel, the remain-der being able to rest or perform routine chores.
Handling: Some vehicles are more maneuverable be-cause of their rigging, the ship’s design, or the advanced knowledge of those who built it. Handling adds directly to the captain’s Boating total, as well as the crew’s if making a group Boating roll. For animal-drawn vehicles, Handling adds to Riding rolls rather than Boating.
Ice Rig: Most vehicles can be fi tted with an ice rig. Comprising two outrunners on which are mounted blades, they allow vessels to be sailed over ice. Special skis can be fi tted over the blades for travel over snow, but it takes 10 minutes per base Toughness (and a full crew) to change them over. Controlling an ice rig ship uses the Boating skill as normal. Oars cannot be used with an ice rig.
Ice rigs cost 100 gs per base Toughness point (ignor-ing Armor) of the vessel.
Passengers: Most vehicles can accommodate twice the number of listed passengers for trips of 24 hours or less. For each 4 hours after this, everyone must make a Vigor roll or suffer a level of Fatigue due to the ramped conditions. This can lead to Exhaustion at worst.
BUSSE
The busse is slow under oars, making it unsuitable for work as a warship, where speed is of the essence. However, it does have a large cargo capacity, making it ideal for mercantile activities. Acc/Top Speed: 1/5 (2/8 under sail); Toughness: 12 (2); Handling: –1; Crew: 40+5; Cost: 3,000 gs; Availability: Town Notes: Ice rig
GEAR
DRAKKAR
This is a small longship, ideally suited for coastal raiding and sailing up shallow rivers. They accelerate well under oars or sail. River patrols in the Crystalfl ow Confederacy make frequent use of them, and they are a common site in most harbors. Acc/Top Speed: 4/10 (5/12 under sail); Toughness: 14 (2); Handling: –1; Crew: 60+10; Cost: 6,000 gs; Avail-ability: Town Notes: Ice rig
GALLEY
Galleys have not been in favor with the civilized races since before the Blizzard War. In current times, only orcs make use of them, forcing slaves or orc runts to row their warships into battle. Although slow under sail, they can achieve great speed for short durations under oar. Acc/Top Speed: 2/8 rowed (1/3 under sail); Toughness: 19 (4); Handling: –2; Crew: 30+100 galley slaves; Cost: 8,000 gs; Availability: City Notes: Heavy Armor (galleys aren’t actually armored, but are massive enough that they require heavy weapons to harm them) Weapons: * Small catapult (Range 24/48/96; Damage 3d6; RoF 1;
AP 4; Small Burst Template; AP 2, Heavy Weapon) * Ram. Heavy Weapon. This gives the ship AP 4 and
halves damage taken by the ship when ramming an opponent’s vessel.
HORSE AND CARRIAGE
This includes coaches, carts, engro wagons, and other horse drawn conveyances. Pygmy mammoths can also pull these vehicles. These vehicles are little use in snow, deep mud, or over thin ice without the addition of an ice rig. Acc/Top Speed: Half animal’s Pace/Top Speed is animal’s Pace + running; Toughness: 10 (2) for wagon/coach; Crew: 1+4 (coach) or 1/10 (wagon); Cost: 500-1000 gs (coach) or 100 gs (wagon); Availability: Village for carts, Town for coaches Notes: Ice rig
KNARR
The knarr is a wide-beamed vessel, whose small size means it is not as well suited to combat or mercantile activities as a purpose built ship. It is relatively inexpen-sive, and thus is the most common vessel on the seas.
Knarrs are also used on navigable rivers, because they can transport more cargo than river barges. However, they are slow movers. Acc/Top Speed: 2/4 (2/6 under sail); Toughness: 14 (2); Handling: –2; Crew: 20+4; Cost: 5,000 gs; Availability: Town Notes: Ice rig
RIVER BARGE
Long, fl at-bottomed, and with a small cabin at the back, river barges are used to ferry goods and people up and down navigable rivers. They typically sail using a small sail, but can be towed along the banks by horses (Acc/Top Speed 1/2).
They are not seaworthy, and have Handling –3 on open water. Acc/Top Speed: 1/4; Toughness: 10 (2); Handling: –1; Crew: 1+50; Cost: 500 gs; Availability: Village Notes: —
ROWBOAT
This is your basic form of sail transport, used in coastal waters or on lakes. Acc/Top Speed: 2/4; Toughness: 8 (2); Handling: +1; Crew: 1+3; Cost: 50 gs; Availability: Village Notes: Can use an ice rig
SKEID
The most powerful warship is the skeid, which mea-sures roughly twice the size of a drakkar. The cost of building, crewing, and maintaining these vessels puts them beyond the reach of all but the most powerful nobles and kings. Acc/Top Speed: 2/10 (2/12 under sail); Toughness: 18 (4); Handling: –1, Crew: 200+10; Cost: 15,000 gs; Availability: Town Notes: Heavy Armor
SMABYRDING
This is a small vessel, perfectly suited for sailing up rivers or performing short coastal hops. It handles poorly in open seas, however. In both environments it is slow under both oar and sail. Acc/Top Speed: 2/5 (2/6 under sail); Toughness: 10 (2); Handling: +1 (coastal or river)/–2 (open sea); Crew: 10+4; Cost: 2,500 gs; Availability: Town Notes: Ice rig
SNEKKE
The archetypal longship, complete with dragon prow, the snekke is designed to handle rough seas but can also navigate fairly shallow rivers.
They are the most common warship, favored by Saxa and Anari alike. On a true military venture, the oars are manned by the warriors who will take place in the cam-paign when they land. Passenger spaces are reserved for support troops, such as mages, or for prisoners taken for ransom or interrogation. Acc/Top Speed: 2/8 (2/10 under sail); Toughness: 15 (2); Handling: +1; Crew: 100+10; Cost: 8,000 gs; Availability: Town Notes: Ice rig
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
SLEDGE
A standard sledge used to haul small amounts of gear or passengers. Orcs favor dire wolves, since they can double as protection. Acc/Top Speed: Half animal’s Pace/Top Speed is animal’s Pace + running; Toughness: 6; Handling: +0; Crew: 1+2 passengers; Cost: 50 gs (not including animals); Availability: Village Notes: Drawn by 2 animals (usually horses or dire wolves), Ice Rig
WAR SLEDGE
A war sledge has a wooden frame with animal hides nailed to it to protect the occupants. Flaps allow the oc-cupants to fi re crossbows or thrust spears at attackers.
Acc/Top Speed: Half animal’s Pace/Top Speed is animal’s Pace + running; Toughness: 8 (2); Handling: –1; Crew: 1+4 passengers; Cost: 200 gs (not including animals); Availability: Village
Notes: Drawn by 2 animals (usually dire wolves or mules), Ice Rig
FORTIFICATIONS
Although full-blown castles are virtually unknown in Rassilon ( Hellfrost Keep being the exception), several other types of fortifi cation exist. These are detailed be-low. Fortifi cations do not have an availability code—such edifi ces are rarely found for sale anywhere.
The following notes apply to all fortifi cations. Toughness: The strength of the outer defenses and
central keep (if any). Each wound creates a 1” gap in the defenses. Walls count as Heavy Armor.
Siege Bonus: This modifi er is added to the defending general’s Battle Rolls and acts as a Morale modifi er for the defenders. The former replaces the usual Terrain Battle Modify, which gives the enemy commander a penalty.
It includes defensive weapons, like boiling oil, as well as murder holes.
Defenders: The usual number of guards on duty at any one time. It takes far fewer men to protect a fortifi ca-tion than to capture it.
If the defenders have warning of an impending attack, double this number. Doubling up the defenders also in-creases the Siege Bonus by +1 (the maximum that can be achieved through extra defenders), but it also halves the amount of time supplies last.
Supplies: The number of weeks of provisions stored in the fortifi cation. If the defenders have time to prepare for a siege, this number is doubled. The listed amount is enough to feed the listed number of defenders. Greater or fewer defenders alters this amount accordingly.
Should the supplies run out, the defenders lose the Siege Bonus modifi er to their Morale rolls, and instead suffer a fl at -2 penalty.
Without supplies, disease and starvation are also great risks. The GM should adjudicate the effects of these, should such be required in his adventure.
Cost: Prices are included as a guide for GMs. Charac-ters should seek permission from the landowner before embarking on a construction project. For fortifi cations raised in unowned territory, the price should be in-creased by 25% to account for the need for guards. With-out these, the construction site is liable to be raided.
RUNNING A FORTIFICATION
The average man cannot hope to ever own a fortifi ca-tion. Even if he could, he has little chance of supporting the household. Nobles, however, have income from taxa-tion and small industries on their land.
A knight or baron (such as a hero with the Noble Edge) generally owns a fortifi ed manor house as part of the Edge. All expenses for maintenance, provisions, and paying the servants is covered in his expenses, and thus does not count as a factor in play.
Rich and Very Rich characters who aren’t nobles have the resources to build and run a fortifi cation. However, unless the hero’s background includes a very good reason for him to begin play with such a structure, he doesn’t get one. He can build one in play, but his Edges do not cover his expenses unless he has land and indus-tries in addition to those his Edges provide.
Such a hero must pay 2% of the fortifi cation’s cost per annum in various bills. For instance, a fortifi ed manor house purchased by a merchant, would drain 400 gs from his coffers. By comparison, a large castle costs a sizeable 15,000 gs per year.
Founding a village or industry to support a fortifi ca-tions lacking such ventures costs money and takes time. For ease, assume it takes 12 months and costs 10% of the fortifi cation’s cost to provide such structures. Although this is a sizeable investment of money and time, the owner need never pay annual bills again—his expenses are now fully covered.
There is much more to land management of course, but factors such as harvest yields, interruptions to the economy through war, famine, or disease, fortuitous gains, like a land grant or rise in population, and such like, will be covered in detail in a future supplement.
For now, just assume the land is profi table enough to be kept as background fl avor (unless the GM design an adventure that places a landowner’s fortune in danger, of course).
FORTIFIED MANOR HOUSE
Usually home to minor nobles or wealthy landowners, fortifi ed manor houses (or fortifi ed steads in Saxa lands) are two story stone structures with no outer defenses, save maybe for a low ditch or wall. Workshops, stables, and barracks are contained in separate outbuildings.
Despite being relatively unprotected, the walls are thick enough to withstand an assault without siege weap-
GEAR
ons. Whereas most rural houses have thatched roofs, a fortifi ed manor or stead has slate or wooden shingles for added protection. Turf may be added to teh roof for insulation.
Toughness: 20 (10); Siege Bonus: +1; Defenders: 10; Supplies: 6; Cost: 20,000 gs
HILL FORT
Hill forts are built primarily as a refuge for the locals in times of war, and are predominantly used by the Saxa. Most were built long before the Anari Empire, when the lands were less settled.
In larger hill forts, permanent villages may exist. Hill forts lack strong defensive walls, instead being construct-ed of concentric ditches and high earth banks, topped with a wooden palisade. The main entrance is blocked by a gate, and protected by a small maze of earthworks, designed to break up the enemy advance. The best-known hill fort is Moot Hill. Toughness: 38 (18); Siege Bonus: +2; Defenders: 400; Supplies: 20; Cost: 250,000 gs
LARGE CASTLE
Large castles comprise a central keep (usually square), a large courtyard containing stables, workshops, and bar-racks, a high curtain wall protected at the corners with towers, and a moat. The Citadel is a large castle.
Toughness: 50 (25); Siege Bonus: +3; Defenders: 300; Supplies: 26; Cost: 750,000 gs
MOTTE AND BAILEY
Motte and bailey castles consist of a small keep or tower, usually on a hill, surrounded by an earth bank with a wood or stone wall on top. Larger versions are divided into two, with barracks and workshops on the lower level, and the keep on a second level, surrounded by its own defensive wall.
The Hearth Knights’ forts are large motte and bailey designs, though with a garrison of 100 Knights. They otherwise use the same stats as detailed below. Toughness: 25 (10); Siege Bonus: +1; Defenders: 50; Supplies: 12; Cost: 60,000 gs
SMALL CASTLE
A small castle comprises a central keep, usually square, a small courtyard area containing workshops and barracks, a stone curtain wall, and, frequently, a moat or ditch. Castle Hrafn is a small castle. Toughness: 32 (18); Siege Bonus: +2; Defenders: 100; Supplies: 26; Cost: 275,000 gs
STONE TOWER
The forerunner of the motte and bailey, a stone tower lacks the defensive earthworks. Usually standing 20 to 30 feet high, with several levels inside, most are home to mages or poor nobles. Toughness: 20 (10); Siege Bonus: +1; Defenders: 10; Supplies: 4; Cost: 15,000 gs
ARMOR
Type Armor Weight Cost Notes Avail
Hide +1 15 75 Covers torso, arms, and legs; see notes V
Leather suit +1 10 50 Covers torso, arms, and legs V
Leather shirt +1 3 20 Covers torso V
Chain hauberk +2 20 300 Covers torso, arms, and legs T
Chain shirt +2 10 200 Covers torso and arms T
Chain leggings +2 8 100 Covers legs T
Chain sleeves +2 6 75 Covers arms T
Scale hauberk +2 25 200 Covers torso, arms, and legs V
Plate corselet +3 20 400 Covers torso C
Plate bracers +3 8 300 Covers arms C
Plate greaves +3 12 200 Covers legs C
Helmet
Chain coif +2 3 50 75% chance of protecting head T
Pot helm +3 4 75 50% chance of protecting head T
Full helmet +3 8 150 Covers head C
Blessed Armor
Blessed robes +1 8 50 Covers torso, arms, and legs; see notes S
Blessed armor +3 30 500 Covers torso, arms, and legs; see notes S
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
MELEE WEAPONS
Type Damage Weight Cost Notes Avail
Primitive Weapons
Antler staff Str+d6 10 300 Parry +1; Reach 1; 2 hands; see notes V
Bear claw Str+d4 8 200 +1 Parry; see notes V
Toothpick, double Str+d6 5 150 See notes V
Toothpick, twin Str+d8 5 200 See notes V
Blades
Boot spikes Str+d4 3 10 Kick attack only, see Gear Notes V
Dagger Str+d4 1 25 V
Flail Str+d6 8 200 Ignores shield Parry and Cover bonuses V
Great sword Str+d10 12 400 Parry –1; 2 hands T
Long sword Str+d8 8 300 V
Short sword Str+d6 4 200 V
Axes
Axe Str+d6 2 200 V
Battle axe Str+d8 10 300 V
Great axe Str+d10 15 400 AP 1; Parry –1; 2 hands T
Hammers & Maces
Mace Str+d6 4 200 V
Maul Str+d8 20 400 AP 2 vs. rigid armor; Parry –1; 2 hands V
Warhammer Str+d6 8 250 AP 1 vs. rigid armor T
Pole Arms
Halberd Str+d8 15 250 Reach 1; 2 hands T
Lance Str+d8 10 250 AP 2 when charging; Reach 2 T
Pike Str+d8 25 300 Reach 2; 2 hands T
Spear, long Str+d6 5 100 Parry +1; Reach 1; 2 hands V
Spear, short Str+d6 3 75 Reach 1 V
Staff Str+d4 8 10 Parry +1; Reach 1; 2 hands V
Amor Cont.
Shields
Small shield — 8 25 +1 Parry V
Medium shield — 12 50 +1 Parry, +2 Armor against ranged attacks V
Large shield — 20 200 +2 Parry, +2 Armor against ranged attacks T
Barding*
Horse, leather +1 15 200 Covers head and torso V
Horse, plate +3 30 1250 Covers head and torso C
Pygmy mammoth, leather +1 25 400 Covers head and torso V
Pygmy mammoth, chain +2 40 1600 Covers head and torso T
War dog, leather +1 3 50 Covers head and torso V
War dog, chain +2 10 250 Covers head and torso T
* See Notes
GEAR
AMMUNITION
Ammo Weight Cost Notes Avail
Arrow, armor piercing 1 lb/5 1 AP 2; may be recovered* V
Arrow, fl eshripper 1 lb/5 1 +2 damage; may be recovered*; see notes V
Arrow, signaling 1 lb/5 2 May be recovered*; see notes V
Arrow, standard 1 lb/5 1/2 May be recovered* V
Ballista bolt 1 4 May be recovered* T
Quarrel 1 lb/5 1 May be recovered* T
Sling stone 1 lb/10 1/10 Can be found** V
* Outdoors, arrows bolts, and quarrels have a 4–6 on a d6 chance of being recovered. Underground or indoors, the chance is reduced to a roll of 5–6 to refl ect the increased chance of breakage.
** Stones can be found for free with a Notice roll and 1d10 minutes searching, depending on terrain
SIEGE WEAPONS
All siege weapons have an Availability of City, and even here they are rare items. They are never available for purchase in steads, villages, or towns.
Item Range Damage Crew Cost Notes
Ballista 25/50/100 3d6 1 800 AP 3, can be used against individual troops, 1 action to reload
Catapult 50/100/200* 3d10 6 2000 AP 10, 4 actions to reload, Medium Burst Template; Heavy Weapon
Coldfi re Thrower Cone/25” 2d10 1 3000 Ignores armor, as vehicular fl amethrower, see notes
Ram, frame — 1d6/yard 2/yard 750 AP 3; max length 10 yards
Ram, hand — 1d6/yard 4/yard 400 AP 3; max length 10 yards
Siege Tower — — 20 3500 Pace 2; carries 30 troops
Trebuchet 24/48/96** 3d8 4 1600 AP 6, 2 actions to reload, Small Burst Template; Heavy Weapon
* Minimum range of 25”.
** Minimum range of 12”.
RANGED WEAPONS
Type Range Damage Cost Weight Min Str. Notes Avail
Axe, throwing 3/6/12 Str+d6 50 2 — V
Bow 12/24/48 2d6 100 3 d6 V
Bow, long 15/30/60 2d6 200 5 d8 V
Crossbow 15/30/60 2d6 300 10 d6 AP 2; 1 action to reload T
Sling 4/8/16 Str+d4 10 1 — V
Short spear* 3/6/12 Str+d6 75 3 d6 As short spear in melee V
Throwing knife 3/6/12 Str+d4 25 1 — T
* Also covers javelins
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
Item Cost Weight Avail
Parchment (per sheet) 1 1/20 V
Pipe, smoking 3+ 1/5 V
Pipeleaf, 5 smokes per pouch 15 — V
Pouch (holds 1 pound) 2 1/2 V
Quiver (holds 20 arrows) 10 2 V
Rope (hemp, 5”)* 10 10 V
Pick or shovel* 5 5 V
Salt (in waterproof bag)* 10 1 V
Sandglass* 25 1 C
Satchel, waterproof 50 1 T
Scroll case, waterproof 5 1/2 T
Skates* 10 1 V
Skis* 40 6 V
Soap 1 1/5 V
Snowshoes* 20 4 V
Tent (2-person, insulated)* 175 10 V
Tent (4-person, insulated)* 300 25 V
Torch* 5 1 V
Whistle 2 — V
Waterskin (holds 2 quarts) 5 1 V
Whale blubber* 25 1 S
Whetstone 5 1 V
Writing equipment 30 1 T
Unusual Goods
Alchemical device* 200/Rank 1 V
Alchemist’s trunk* 300 15 C
Herbalist kit* 100 3 V
Herbal remedy (any)* 50 1 V
Herbs, dried* 5 per batch 1 V
Norn charm* 250 1 S
Tome of learning* 1,000/Rank 1 S
Tome of lore (+1 to +3)* 500/point 1–3 S
Tome of lore (+4 to +6)* 2,000/point 4–6 S
Food
Average meal 2 — T
Cheap meal 5 ss — V
Expensive meal 20+ — T
One week’s rations 10 5 V
One day’s water (2 quarts) — 4 V
* See notes.
Animals (Trained) & Tack
Item Cost Weight Avail
Dog, war 200 — V
Hawk 350 — T
Horse, riding 300 — V
Horse, war 1,000 — T
Mammoth, pygmy 3,000 — T
Mule 150 — V
Pigeon, carrier* 10 1 T
Saddle 30 10 V
Saddle, war 200 10 C
Clothing
Normal clothing 10 — V
Formal clothing 75 — V
Tailored clothing* 250 — T
Furs* 50 5 V
Winter clothing* 100 10 V
Common Goods
Backpack 5 2 V
Bandolier* 10 1 T
Bedroll 25 4 V
Blanket 10 4 V
Boot spikes* 10 3 V
Candle* 1 1/2 V
Climbing gear* 50 4 V
Crowbar 10 2 V
Firewood (per pound)* 5 1 V
Flask (ceramic) 5 1 V
Flask (metal) 10 1 T
Flint and steel 3 1 V
Game set* 50 1 V
Goggles* 25 2 T
Grappling hook* 50 2 V
Hammer 10 1 V
Healer’s bag* 100 2 V
Icewood (per pound)* 25 1 S
Insect net, 1” square* 15 3 V
Lantern* 25 3 T
Lantern, bullseye* 50 3 T
Lockpicks* 150 1 T
Musical instrument* 50+ 1+ V
Oil (1 pint)* 2 1 V
MUNDANE GEAR
This chapter takes a look at hedge magic, or natural magic as it is more politely called. Despite the name, hedge magic does not involve manipulating the threads of magic and a practitioner does not require an Arcane Background. However, they must take a Professional Edge (see page 27) in order to learn one of the various arts. A hero can have the Hedge Magic Edge and an Ar-cane Background simultaneously.
Hedge Magic & the Magic Rules: Unlike true magic, which is detailed in the next chapter, hedge magic is not subject to any form of backlash or the Hellfrost effect. Likewise, devices created using these arts cannot be dis-pelled or negated.
HERBALISM
Herbalism was once widespread across Rassilon. As the Convocation slowly spread its infl uence, so it worked with zealous clerics to have the art declared anathema. Tens of thousands of wise women and healers across the land were hanged or burnt at the stake for being servants of the dark gods. Alchemy, an art only available to clerics and mages, rose to fi ll the vacuum.
However, things changed during the Blizzard War. The migrating engro, who had never been subjected to Anari rule brought the knowledge of herbalism with them, and interest in the art was rekindled, especially among the more rural Saxa, who had lost much of their knowledge. The elves, of course, never lost the art, but neither did they wish to share their knowledge. Today, herbalists are an accepted part of society to all but the most fanatical spellcasters.
Although to the peasantry herbalists appear to work magic, in truth their art is one of detailed knowledge regarding the natural world. Herbalists generally have no actual magical abilities, though some mages (mainly druids) and clerics (typically of Eira and Eostre) make a comfortable living through the art.
An herbalist’s knowledge is specialist knowledge. Boiling, grinding, soaking, infusing, or mashing roots, leaves, and herbs may seem easy, but a single moment of distraction, failure to prepare the herb for long enough or perhaps for too long, or even picking the wrong plant can ruin the entire batch and waste precious hours, even days.
Creating an herbal remedy requires a few simple steps. Work through these in the order below.
HEDGE MAGIC
WHY USE HERBALISM?
Why would a hero take the Herbalism Edge if some-one in the party has the Alchemy Edge? There are several good reasons. First, an herbalist can brew any remedy he wishes. Alchemists can only use spells they know in alchem-ical devices. Second, herbal remedies do not generate backlash, nor are they subject to the Siphoning, and such like. Third, alchemical devices cost lots of money to make, whereas herbal remedies generally only take time. That said, alchemical devices are usually far more powerful. Fourth, alchemical devices register as relics to the touch. Heroes who are arrested and searched are likely have their alchemical devices confi scated. Herbal remedies are perfectly natural, however, and do not register as relics. Fifth, once an alchemical device is in use, its power can be dispelled or negated. This does not apply to herbal remedies. Sixth, herbal remedies can’t often be turned against the heroes. A villain disarming your restorative ton-ic isn’t as dangerous as one who disarms your bolt wand and uses it against you.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
PURPOSE
The fi rst thing a hero must decide is what his herbal
remedy does. A sample list is given below, but players’ may invent their own uses, subject to GM approval. In general, herbal remedies should always be less powerful then spells.
The number in parentheses is a modifi er to the hero’s Knowledge (Alchemy) skill to actually create the remedy. The more powerful the effect, the harder the remedy is to produce. Most remedies should be limited in the number of doses that may be taken at once—typically to just one. Likewise, potions with an extended effect last no more than one hour (the same as magical potions).
Ideally, the player should take this opportunity to stamp his mark on the campaign and give the plant he seeks a name. This could be related to the effect (such as “Frothroot” or “Madwood” for a berserk-inducing rem-edy), purely descriptive (red leaf or candle mushroom), or completely made up (amalas or tetholinis leaf).
The player and GM should use common sense when deciding on the type of plant. Trees do not grow above the treeline on mountains, plants in ice plains are likely to be lichens or mosses growing on stones, and vegeta-tion requiring sunlight is very unlikely to grow in deep caves.
Anti-anemia (0): Each dose negates the Anemic Hin-drance for one hour.
Anti-infl ammatory (0): The patient removes one level of Fatigue caused by Bumps and Bruises after just 6 hours instead of 24 hours. Only one dose may be applied per six-hour period.
Antibacterial (+1): The hero has +1 to Vigor rolls to resist disease for the next hour. Multiple doses have no additional benefi ts.
Antihistamine (0 or –2): Used to treat allergies. A remedy brewed using the fi rst number removes a hero’s Allergy (Minor) Hindrance for one hour or reduces the Major version to Minor for the same period. With the second modifi er, the Allergy Hindrance is ignored for an hour, regardless of its severity.
Antitoxin (+1): Grants +1 to Vigor rolls to resist poi-son for an hour. It has no effect on toxins already in the bloodstream. Taking multiple doses grants no additional benefi ts.
Berserk (–2): The hero gains the Berserk Edge for an hour. Although he can calm down with a Smarts roll, he risks going Berserk again until the brew wears off.
Food Substitute (0): Each dose is most commonly used as a form of emergency rations, providing much needed energy, though little nutrients, when food is scarce. A dose is equivalent to a whole day’s food re-quirements.
For every four days spent eating nothing but the rem-edy the hero suffers a one die reduction in his Vigor due to a lack of essential nutrients and vitamins. Vigor cannot drop below a d4. For each day after his Vigor reaches a d4, he gains a Fatigue level instead (this can lead to death if he is force fed more). Lost dice and Fatigue re-
cover at the rate of one die per day of rest and proper meals (both conditions must be met).
Healing (Specifi c) (+1): The remedy grants a +1 bonus to cure physical damage of a specifi c sort, such as burns (hot or cold), cuts (stabbing or slashing attacks), or breakages (blunt trauma). The remedy grants +1 to Healing rolls to treat such injuries. Only one dose may be used per injury. If a dose is used every day for four days, the patient gains +1 to his Natural Healing roll.
Healing (Regenerative) (–4): The hero makes a Nat-ural Healing roll after 48 hours. Multiple doses within the same week have no additional effect.
Hydrating (+1): Counts as drinking the equivalent of 2 quarts of water. However, taking more than one dose a day can lead to diarrhea and stomach cramps. For each dose a hero takes after the fi rst in a single day he must make a Vigor roll or suffer a level of Fatigue with a cumulative –1 penalty (so–1 for two doses, –2 for three, and so on). A hero Incapacitated by this is unable to move due to the pain. Recovery of one Fatigue level requires 24 hours rest with no intake of liquid.
Numbing (–1): Taking a dose reduces wound penal-ties by 1 for the next hour. Taking multiple doses gives no additional benefi ts.
Purgative (–3): Taking a dose induces violent vom-iting, which cleanses the body of toxins. A single dose immediately removes any poison. A patient Fatigued or physically wounded by poison remains in that state until he heals naturally, but he will not get worse. Poisons that induce paralysis or similar effects are immediately negated, leaving the patient free to move. The victim is Fatigued for 24 hours due to the vomiting.
Restorative (–2): One dose removes one level of Fatigue, regardless of the source. Although it cures the symptoms, it doesn’t remove the cause.
A hero who is suffering from dehydration is still thirsty, for instance, he just isn’t as tired as he was. Likewise, a poisoned character may feel okay, but the poison is still in his system. If the poison requires a roll every hour to avoid Fatigue, for example, the victim still has to keep rolling until the posion has worked its way through his system.
A maximum of one dose per day may be imbibed—ad-ditional doses have no effect.
Soporifi c (–1): Anyone imbibing a single dose must make a Vigor roll. With failure, the victim falls asleep for 2d6 hours. Each additional dose ingested at the same time gives a cumulative –1 penalty to the Vigor roll, to a maximum of –4. Being under the infl uence of a Stimu-lant I brew gives a +2 bonus to resist this effect.
Stimulant I (+2): Gives +2 to Vigor rolls to stay awake and lasts for 12 hours. A patient who takes more than one dose in a 24-hour period gains the Mean Hin-drance for the next 6 hours. Heroes who have already succumbed to lack of sleep gain no benefi t if force-fed the remedy.
Stimulant II (–1): The patient has +1 to Spirit rolls to recover from being Shaken for an hour. Multiple doses have no effect.
HEDGE MAGIC
Stimulant III (–2): The patient has +1 to all Agility, Strength, and Vigor rolls for an hour, but suffers a –1 penalty to all rolls requiring concentration, including spellcasting, Knowledge rolls, Tracking, and such like. Likewise, he cannot use Edges requiring concentration, such as Marksman, or make Smarts Tricks or Taunts. The GM has the fi nal word on what rolls are penalized. Mul-tiple doses have no additional effect.
Warming (–2): For the next six hours, the patient has +1 to Vigor rolls to resist the effects of cold weather. It provides no protection against cold-based attacks. Only one dose may be applied at a time.
FORM
The player should decide what form his herbal rem-
edy takes, if only for storytelling reasons. Some common examples are given below. As always, a player should be limited only by his imagination, not these examples. * Powder designed to be smoked or inhaled.
* Chewing bark, leaves, roots, stems, or seeds. * Oil made from plant extract. * Infusion made from the leaves, seeds, or roots. * Rolled leaves, balls of moss, seed cakes, candy made
with plant extracts. * Vapors to be inhaled.
FINDING INGREDIENTS
Herbal remedies require plant matter. This may be
bark, shots, grasses, leaves, roots, tubers, seeds, fungi, or even moss and lichen. Typically, an herbal remedy uses one key plant as its main ingredient, to which may be added lesser herbs found in every herbalist’s kit or easily gathered.
When it comes to the key ingredient, the hero must decide if he wishes to use a common plant or one that is scarcer. Common plants generally have weaker curative powers, so while they are easier to fi nd, they are harder to turn into a workable remedy. Conversely, rare plants,
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
while harder to fi nd, are far more potent and easier to work with.
A hero must make a Knowledge (Alchemy) or Survival roll (his choice) to fi nd enough materials for his brew. Medicinal plants are widely known and any character with the Survival skill may make this roll, even if he lacks the skill to properly prepare them. This is modifi ed by the rarity of the plant and the time of year, as detailed below. The roll may be made as a Cooperative or Group Roll, as applicable.
Success fi nds one batch of herbs and a raise 1d4 batches. Unless the herbalist wishes to keep some plants in reserve for later use, multiple batches of the same remedy may be brewed simultaneously.
Rarity: A hero may elect to take a positive or negative modifi er to his roll to fi nd suitable plants. For each +1 bonus he takes in this step, his Knowledge (Alchemy) roll in the next step suffers a –1 penalty. Conversely, if he takes a negative modifi er (indicating a rare plant), he gains an equal bonus to his Alchemy roll. Modifi ers can-not be higher than +4 or lower than –4.
Note that no plants grow in the Glittersands. No roll to locate a medicinal plant may be attempted in this region.
Season: In summer, there is no additional modifi er, as most fl owers and herbs are in full bloom. Spring or fall gives an additional –1 penalty, and there is a –2 penalty in winter.
This modifi er does not affect the Knowledge (Alchemy) roll when brewing. For instance, a hero who searches for a rare plant (–4) in winter (–2) has –6 to his roll to locate the herb. When he comes to brew his potion, he gains only +4 to his Alchemy roll to create the brew.
Time: Locating a batch of suitable plant material usu-ally takes 4 hours, modifi ed by the rarity. For each +1 bonus to the search roll, subtract one hour (after an hour the time drops to 30 minutes). For each –1 penalty, add one hour (maximum of 8 hours). The GM may shorten or lengthen this time in the interests of a good story.
PRESERVED INGREDIENTS
Ingredients are best used fresh. Although an herbalist may use dried, pickled, or otherwise preserved plants, they are less potent. Creating a remedy with non-fresh materials gives a fl at –2 penalty to the Knowledge (Al-chemy) roll in the next step.
Preserving ingredients takes 8 hours, during which time the herbs must be dried or smoked. Typically, this prevents travel during that time.
PREPARING THE CONCOCTION
Once the ingredients are gathered, the hero must
prepare the remedy. The exact method for preparing the gathered plants varies immensely. Drying, soaking, pounding, mashing, cutting, rolling, and boiling are typically required for the plant to release its medicinal properties, though some may be eaten with minimal preparation.
The time it takes to prepare a remedy has a direct affect on its ease of creation. The shorter the time, the less effective the remedy generally is, whereas a long preparation time allows more of the plant’s medicinal properties to come through. This is shown on the table below.
Only a single brew may be concocted at any one time—herbalism requires great patience and attention to detail. The limit to how many doses of a single remedy a character may brew simultaneously is limited only by the quantity of ingredients he has to hand, but an herbalist may only brew one sort of remedy at a time.
PREPARATION TABLE
Time Alchemy Mod 1d6 rounds –2 1d6 minutes –1 1d6 hours 0 2d6 hours +1 4d6 hours +2 1d6 days +4 The herbalist then makes a Knowledge (Alchemy)
roll, applying modifi ers for the plant’s rarity and time of preparation. Success garners a single dose per batch of ingredients used. On a raise, the brew is particularly potent—two doses per batch of ingredients are created. With failure, the ingredients and time are wasted.
Once an herbal remedy is actually prepared, it is good for just one week (8 days). After this time, the potency rapidly declines and provides no benefi ts to the end user. Disreputable herbalists have been known to sell remedies past their use by date.
EXAMPLE REMEDY CREATION
A small party of adventurers has been acted by giant ants, and one of their number has been carried off.
Dave’s character, Grizzel the Hag, knows she is go-ing to be entering the nest soon, and wants to make an antitoxin just in case she is attacked.
The effect she wants is an antitoxin. The antitoxin effect grants a +1 bonus to her Knowledge (Alchemy) rolls.
Time is not on her side, however, as the ants have kidnapped one of her comrades and may decide to feed him to their young as a snack. She opts to hunt down a very common plant, taking +3 on her roll to locate the right one. It’s summer, so there is no seasonal modifi er to her roll.
After an hour (base 4 hours minus 3 for the common nature) she succeeds in tracking down a certain moss with the right properties and gathers a single batch.
In preparing the potion she currently has a –2 penalty (+1 from the effect, –3 for the rarity). She spends just 1d6 minutes preparing the moss by rapidly boiling it to remove the bitter taste, giving a further –1 penalty. Finally, she rolls her Knowledge (Alchemy) at –3. She scores a raise, creating two doses, which she pops into a pouch.
Magic is not treated as anything unusual in Ras-silon. All races have the capability for magic, though each has its own preferences. Mundanes may not un-derstand how magic works, but they don’t fear mages (unless they’re casting an offensive spell at them, of course).
The odd-man out, so to speak, is hrimwisardry. Born with the advent of the advancing winter, the vast majority of non-spellcasters see the art as somehow linked to the growing cold. Most claim that hrim-wisardry somehow “sucks” the heat from the world, thus allowing the winters to worsen. Others insist hrimwisards are possessed by Hellfrost fi ends (which they have never seen, of course), or are actually fi ends in disguise. Even other forms of mages dislike hrim-wisards, whose powers grow stronger as the climate worsens.
Of all the arcane types, skalds are the most wel-come in civilized domains. Although their magic can-not warm hearths, their tales of better days, glory days, can warm the heart.
Heahwisards, armed with their staves, are slightly mistrusted, but only because they are arrogant and of noble blood. Most citizens outside of the Magocracy have never seen a heahwisard, for they rarely leave the comfort of their manors and castles.
Rune mages are unknown outside of dwarf lands, and they do not like to show off their magic in front of outsiders. Druids are rarely seen in settlements, though most folk can understand how, in principal, their magic works, seeing all elves (the main practitio-ners) as rather too close to nature and technologically primitive to be called truly civilized.
Elementalists are as common as mud in some places and rarer than hens’ teeth in others. Opinion of them varies depending on the practitioner. Some are kind-hearted, using their powers to aid those in need. Oth-ers are selfi sh, seeking only temporal power over the mundane masses. Most, however, fi t somewhere in between.
CHANGES TO THE NORMAL RULES
The following setting rules apply to all forms of Arcane Background in the Hellfrost setting. Unless a change is noted below, the normal rules apply.
POWER POINTS
The Hellfrost setting does not use Power Points. The only limits on how often characters may cast a spell is their willingness to risk the effects of the deadly backlash known as the Siphoning (which doesn’t affect clerics) or offend the gods (which does).
USING POWERS
As an action, a character may use a single power by declaring the spell he’s using and making an arcane skill roll. Unlike other Savage Worlds settings, arcane charac-ters in Hellfrost aren’t limited in how many times a day they can work their power—however, magic does come with a heavy price.
On a successful roll, consult the particular power to determine the results. For purposes of successful activa-tion, powers always use the standard target number of 4, even if the effect of the power is based on an Opposed or attack roll.
For instance, if a mage casts bolt against a target in Heavy Cover (–4), he requires an 8 or better to hit. However, spell failure occurs only on a 3 or less. A roll of 4 through 7 means the bolt was cast successfully but missed its target.
Some powers have variable effects depending on if the caster takes a modifi er to his arcane skill roll. The player must declare this before rolling his character’s arcane skill to see if he’s successful.
MAGIC
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
MAINTAINING SPELLS
A spellcaster may have a number of Maintained pow-ers active at any one time equal to half his arcane skill die.
Unless otherwise stated, Maintained powers may be kept active as long as the caster is conscious, capable of performing a free action each round, and his concentra-tion is not disrupted (see Disruption in Savage Worlds).
Maintained spells may be dropped as a free action. All benefi ts cease immediately if the spell is dropped for any reason.
Note that while it is obviously tempting for any arcane character to spend time each morning casting, dropping, and recasting spells like armor and defl ection until he scores a raise, backlash can be a serious problem in Hell-frost.
NPCs aren’t the same as player characters—they ac-cept whatever roll is made when they invoke a spell and don’t keep canceling and re-rolling until they get a raise. Of course, the GM can always forgo any roll made before combat and assume a raise was scored.
BACKLASH (ARCANE)
Mages suffer an effect known as the Siphoning (see p. 50). This replaces the standard rules for backlash.
BACKLASH (MIRACLES)
Contacting the gods to work miracles is not without risks, for they dislike those who abuse their power or call upon it too often.
A cleric who rolls a 1 on his Faith die, regardless of the Wild die, is automatically Shaken. This counts as a physi-cal effect and thus can lead to wounds. A critical failure results in a level of Fatigue for the next hour.
In addition, miracle workers use the standard rules for sins, which should be strictly enforced in this set-ting.
MAGIC & THE MOON
The single moon that orbits the world is known to be a great source of magical energy. Detect arcana spells focused at the moon reveal tendrils of energy snaking through the heavens in all directions.
From the thicker strands that reach Rassilon, minute fi laments fi lter down to touch everything in the world. Magic fl ows through every person, animal, tree, rock, stream, snowfl ake, and weapon. Only creatures with the Magic Forbiddance Hindrance are untouched by the fi la-ments, and mages have yet to reach a majority decision on why that should be.
It is these fi laments that allow the races to wield mag-ic, though the strands themselves only act as a gateway. Elementalists, for instance, actually draw their power
directly from the elemental realms, whereas heahwisards tap into the energy fi elds through their staves. Druids merely awaken the natural energy present in all things, hrimwisards manipulate the cold aura of the Hellfrost, and rune mages channel the fl ow through their carved runes. But regardless of how a spellcaster manipulates it, all magic stems from the same source—the moon.
No mage can directly access the raw magic, for such a force would rip his mind, body, and soul into myriad pieces.
THE SIPHONING
The Siphoning fi rst occurred a little less than 30 years ago. At fi rst mages mistook it for a natural glitch in the fl ow of the magical energy fi elds, a phenomenon perhaps on a long cycle, and thus one that had not occurred since the Blizzard War. But as the number of incidents and the severity of the disturbances increased, so mages came to another conclusion—something was deliberately drain-ing their magic. Mages soon called the phenomenon the Siphoning.
Since the discovery of the Siphoning, the use of magic has dropped sharply. Mages who once cast spells regu-larly are now fearful of frivolous casting, lest they draw the attention of a mage bane, temporarily lose access to their magic, or, worse, suffer a permanent loss of power. A wise mage chooses carefully when to cast and when to rely on his other talents.
The strange part is: the Siphoning only drains magic being woven into spells. The raw magic of the world seems unaffected. Although fi re magic is also weakening, that is down to another cause (see p. 51).
The Siphoning has no effect on miracle workers—only on characters with a magical Arcane Background. This has led a fanatical splinter sect of the church of Maera, goddess of magic, to declare magic a “false faith wor-shipped by those blinded to the true light.”
The majority of Maera’s clergy don’t see things this way, partly because most mages actually pay homage to Maera and partly because their divinations have revealed no clues to the source of the Siphoning. If Maera knows, she is not telling her faithful.
There is also the theological matter of why did Maera invent the threads of magic if she did not intend them to be used?
MAGICAL BACKLASH
The Siphoning has a strange effect on mages, re-
moving their ability to work magic effectively, though seemingly with random intensity. When subjected to the Siphoning, a mage feels his power being drawn away, leaving him unable to weave the strands of magic. In rare cases, mages have actually felt empowered instead of drained, as if they had somehow tapped into a hidden reservoir of magical energy. In game terms, the Siphon-
MAGIC
ing manifests during backlash. These rules completely replace the standard rules on backlash for wizards.
On a roll of 1 on the arcane skill die, regardless of Wild Die, the mage must roll 2d6. Check the result against the Siphoning Table below. If the Wild Die indicates a suc-cess, the spell activates before the Siphoning Table result is applied (though the result may instantly negate it).
With a critical failure, the mage rolls 3d6 instead and takes the lowest two as his result. The Siphoning makes casting multiple bolts extremely dangerous!
LOSING ACCESS TO POWERS
If a wizard loses access to his powers as a result of the Siphoning, any spells currently in effect are automati-cally canceled as well. For instance, a mage with armor Maintained who rolls a 3 on the table suffers a wound, cannot cast spells for 1d4 days, and loses the benefi ts of his active armor spell.
MAGES IN MASS BATTLES
Arcane characters in a Mass Battle ignore all Shaken and Fatigued results from the Siphoning Table, including Shaken results gained from taking wounds. Battle phases are long enough to give a hero time to recover before the next one begins.
Other conditions, such as losing your powers for 1d6 hours with a Minor Loss still apply—only the level of Fatigue is ignored.
The temporary Glitch and Slight Drain results are likewise ignored, as the caster recovers from these condi-tions long before a Mass Battle round ends.
SIPHONING TABLE 2d6 Effect 2 Siphoned: The Siphoning takes hold of the
character, drawing off his magical ability. He must make a Spirit roll –2 (as a free action) or lose a permanent die in his arcane skill. He also cannot use his powers for 1d6 days. Characters reduced below a d4 permanently lose their Arcane Background ( Magic) Edge and may not take another one.
3 Major Loss: The character suffers an auto-matic wound. He also loses the ability to use his powers for 1d4 days.
4 Moderate Loss: The mage takes a level of Fa-tigue for 30 minutes. He also loses the ability to use his powers for 24 hours.
5 Minor Loss: The caster takes a level of Fa-tigue for 10 minutes and can’t use his powers for 1d6 hours.
6–8 Temporary Glitch: The caster is Shaken and unable to use his powers for 1d6 rounds.
9–10 Slight Drain: The mage is Shaken. He can’t use his powers for 1d4 rounds.
11 Magic Shock: The caster is Shaken.
12 Power Surge: The sorcerer taps into a par-ticularly potent source of magic and gains +2 to his arcane skill rolls for the next 24 hours.
THE HELLFROST EFFECT
As if mages didn’t suffer enough, what with lunar tidal fl ows and the Siphoning, they must also contend with the Hellfrost’s effect on fi re magic. Clerics and paladins, especially those of Kenaz (god of fi re) and Sigel (god of the sun), both of whom vanished during the Blizzard War, are plagued by a similar effect.
Arcane scholars and clerics have spent long hours debating the cause of this phenomenon, and few can agree on the cause. That the disappearance of two gods could cause the powers of their followers to weaken is understandable, but what force could affect the elemen-tal realm of fi re is more mysterious, for what can thwart a building block of creation?
The weakening of fi re magic hasn’t gone unnoticed by the masses. Most are confused as to its diminishment, for the mages they ask cannot agree on a cause. Most simply blame hrimwisards, seeing them as the antithesis of fi re mages.
Any spellcaster, arcane or miracle worker, invoking a spell using a heat or fi re trapping suffers penalties as shown below, based on the current temperature. This strange phenomenon also affects creatures using fi re-based abilities that require a die roll to activate or aim. Damage is unaffected.
HELLFROST CURSE MODIFIER
Temp (F) Temp (C) Modifi er 32 to 13 0 to –10 –1 12 to –7 –11 to –21 –2 –8 to –27 –22 to –32 –3 –28 to –47 –33 to –44 –4 –48 to –67 –45 to –55 –5 –68 or lower –56 or lower –6
THE ELEMENTAL REALMS
Although the races follow the gods, they also believe in the elements as a power base. Elementalists are able to tap into natural energy fi elds, which fl ow from the elemental realms into the planet.
The elements aren’t, and never have been, seen as gods or even specifi c named entities, but more like left-over threads of the planet from its creation. However, whether the elemental gods power the realms or draw their own power from them is a source of contention between clerics and elementalists.
No mortal has even claimed to have visited the el-emental realms, though that in no way diminishes belief
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
in them. The existence of elementalism and elementals, not to mention the elemental gods, is proof enough. Since the Blizzard War, the elemental realm of fi re has become harder to reach.
Fire magic has been on the decline for centuries, and even the sun is weak and dim compared to even a de-cade ago.
ELEMENTAL LOCI
Although elementalists cannot tap extra energy from
storms, tidal waves, earthquakes, or other natural phe-nomena, there do exist elemental loci, places where the elemental realm and mortal plane overlap. These are places of great power for elementalists attuned to the correct element, but also dangerous, for many uncon-trolled elementals wander these regions.
A locus is usually, but not always, a place related to the elemental realm it touches. A fi re locus, for instance, is more common in a volcano than in a forest, whereas an air locus is much more likely to be found high on a mountain than out at sea.
So far only loci to the major realms of air, earth, fi re, and water have been discovered. Coldfi re loci are ru-mored to exist in the Hellfrost, but no elementalist can attune himself to coldfi re, and hrimwisards fi nd only the unnatural cold to their advantage. If an elemental realm of coldfi re truly exists, mortals have yet to make contact with it beyond summoning a few species of elementals.
DIMENSIONS
A locus is defi ned by three regions, known as the outer reach, inner reach, and core. The inner reach rings the core, and the outer reach encircles the inner reach. Together these form a series of concentric spheres.
The exact size of these varies, but typically a core measures only around 4 yards (2”) across, the inner reach 8 yards (4”), and the outer reach 12 yards (6”).
In game terms, you can represent these by placing a Small, Medium, and Large Burst Template on top of each other.
EFFECT
With the outer reach, an elemen-talist who has mastered the same element of the locus has +1 to his Elementalism rolls as he draws from a direct source of elemental power. In the inner reach this rises to +2, and in the core to +4.
An elementalist not in tune with the element actually suffers penalties of –1, –2, and –4 respectively, as he fi nds his ability to reach the realms he does know drown out the realms he does not.
Within such a rich source of magic backlash is far worse than normal. Within any part of a locus, the price for failing to cast a spell is an auto-matic wound as the elemental forces tear at the mage’s body. No magic can prevent this.
On a roll of 1 or a critical failure, the mage suffers the effects of the Siphoning. He rolls an additional 1d6 in the outer reach, an extra 2d6 in the inner, and 3d6 in the core. In all cases, he uses the dice that give him the lowest result.
For example, a mage who rolls a critical failure on an arcane skill roll normally rolls 3d6 and takes the lowest two dice to compare against the Siphoning table. If he was in the core of an elemental locus, he’d roll 5d6 and take the lowest two.
MAGIC ARCANE BACKGROUNDS
Heroes who take the Arcane Background (Magic) Edge must pick one of the arcane spellcaster types detailed below. This replaces the standard Arcane Background (Magic) Edge, which is not available to player characters in the Hellfrost setting.
MAGIC
Each arcane type has a specifi c arcane skill (which replaces Spellcasting).
The description also details the number of powers the character begins with when he takes the Edge, as well as which powers he may pick. Powers not on the list cannot be chosen. The standard rules for choosing powers ap-ply. Most arcane types also have special rules.
DRUIDISM
Requirements: Novice, Engro, Elves (any), Frost
Dwarf Arcane Skill: Druidism (Smarts) Starting Powers: 3 Powers: Animate war tree, armor, barrier, beast
friend, bolt, boost/lower trait, bridge, burrow, defl ec-tion, detect/conceal, elemental form, elemental manip-ulation, entangle, environmental protection, farsight, fatigue, feast, fog cloud, growth/shrink, healing, knock-down, leaping, light, obscure, quake, refuge, sanctuary, sentry, shape change, silence, smite, sphere of might, storm, summon beast, summon elemental (wood), vi-per weapon, voice on the wind, wall walker, warding (animals and plants only), whirlwind, wilderness step.
Druids draw their power from the natural energy fi elds surrounding the earth, plants, and animals. Al-though they do manipulate the elemental energy fi elds, their skill is limited. While frost dwarves are in tune with the natural world, especially the earth, they favor rune magic. Humans have proven adept at manipulating the elements, but do not have enough understanding of the natural world to become druids.
They are powerful in the wilds, but suffer within artifi cial or worked structures, which block the natural energy fi elds. This is shown on the table below. Modifi ers apply to Druidism rolls.
Mod Locale +1 Completely natural (cave, desert, forest) +0 Rural (outside in a village, a worked cave, a
mine) –1 Urban (inside a village building, anywhere in
a town or city, within other enclosed, artifi cial structures)
ELEMENTALISM
Arcane Skill: Elementalism (Smarts) Starting Powers: 3 Spell List (Eir): Aim, banish (air elementals only),
becalm, beast friend (fl ying beasts only), bolt, defl ec-tion, detect/conceal, elemental form (air only), elemen-tal manipulation (air only), energy immunity (air and earth only), environmental protection (targets can breathe normally in poisonous gas), ethereal/corporeal, farsight, fatigue, fl y, glyph, invisibility, knockdown, leaping, obscure, quickness, sanctuary, sentry, silence, slumber, speak language, sphere of might, storm, sum-mon elemental (air only), telekinesis, teleport, voice on
the wind, wandering senses, warding (elementals only), whirlwind, zephyr.
Spell List ( Ertha): Armor, banish (earth elementals only), barrier, beast friend (terrestrial-based beasts only), bladebreaker, blast, bolt, bridge, burrow, detect/ conceal, elemental form (earth only), elemental ma-nipulation (earth only), energy immunity (air and earth only), entangle, glyph, growth/shrink, knockdown, lock/ unlock, mend, prolonged blast, quake, refuge, sanctu-ary, sphere of might, summon elemental (earth only), viper weapon, wall walker, warding (elementals only), weapon immunity, wilderness step.
Spell List (Fyr): Aura, banish (fi re elementals only), barrier, bladebreaker, blast, bolt, burst, defl ection, detect/conceal, elemental form (fi re only), elemental manipulation (fi re), energy immunity (cold, coldfi re, heat, fi re, ice, water), environmental protection (heat only), fatigue, glyph, heat mask, light, prolonged blast, sanctuary, smite, sphere of might, summon elemental (fi re only), warding (elementals only).
Spell List (Waeter): Banish (water elementals only), beast friend (aquatic beasts only), bolt, detect/conceal, elemental form (water only), elemental manipulation (water only), energy immunity (fi re and water only), en-vironmental protection (targets can move and breathe underwater), fatigue, fog cloud, glyph, healing, knock-down, quickness, sanctuary, speed, sphere of might, storm, stun, succor, summon elemental (water only), warding (elementals only), water walk.
A hero who takes this form of magic must immediately decide whether or not he belongs to the Convocation of Elementalists. Those who are gain the Connections (Convocation) Edge and Orders Hindrance. Those who do not are considered free agents, and thus cannot call upon the Convocation for support.
Elemental mages must choose a single element—eir (air), ertha (earth), fyr (fi re), or waeter (water)—to serve. Fire has weakened since the Blizzard War, but is still very usable in warmer climes.
An elementalist’s power comes from the bound spir-its of these raw elements. Their powers are limited and specialized, however, so young wizards must choose carefully, as the element chosen determines their avail-able powers.
Elemental mages choose a single element when fi rst starting out. As they advance in experience and wisdom, they may slowly learn to master other elements as well. There is a steep price to pay for this, however. See the Elemental Mastery Edge for details (p. 26).
Casting: Mages must make gestures with at least one free hand and speak aloud various magical words at least at a whisper. If either their hands are bound or they are prevented from speaking, they cannot cast their spells.
Elemental Spells: Note that elemental protection works slightly differently for elementalists—each type of elementalist gains a very specifi c use of the power.
An elementalist with both earth and fi re can also ban-ish or summon lava elementals. Water and earth allow mud elementals to be called forth. Earth and air can be
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
used to create dust elementals, and a mage with fi re and water can call steam elementals.
Trappings: Trappings and effects must be related to the elements in question, where applicable. An air mage, for instance, can shape change into a bird or fl ying in-sect, but he cannot change into a fi sh or earth-bound creature (such as a dog).
HEAHWISARDRY
Requirements: Novice, Noble, character must have
been born in the Magocracy Arcane Skill: Heahwisardry (Smarts) Starting Powers: 3 Spell List: Arcane resistance, armor, aura, banish,
barrier, bladebreaker, blast, bodyguard, bolt, boost/ lower trait, burst, defl ection, detect/conceal, dispel, energy immunity, entangle, environmental protection, farsight, fatigue, fear, fog cloud, glyph, knockdown, mimic, negate arcana, prolonged blast, puppet, quick-ness, refuge, sanctuary, slumber, silence, smite, speed, sphere of might, storm, stun, summon elemental, teleki-nesis, teleport, warding, weapon immunity.
Heahwisardry is taught solely within the Magocracy, and then only to the ruling class. There’s more informa-tion on heahwisardry in the sidebar.
To most, a staff is just a big walking stick, but to a heahwisard it is both a symbol and focus of his magical abilities. All heahwisards are gifted with a staff on com-pleting their apprenticeship. The staff is bonded to the mage in a complex ritual, and a heahwisard can only ever own one such staff during his life. Treat the staff as a quarterstaff with respect its combat stats. All heahwisards receive their staff for free.
Casting: A heahwisard casting a spell without his staff in his hands suffers a –6 penalty. Heahwisards who betray the Magocracy have their staff ritually broken (no easy task), robbing the mage of much of his power.
A mage using another mage’s staff has a –4 penalty to arcane skill rolls and no access to any of the staff ’s augmentations (p. 25).
Mechanics: Heahwisard magic contains a strong cer-emonial aspect. Although practitioners can cast spells as a single action, their true power comes when they spend time invoking magic.
Heahwisards suffer a –2 penalty to all arcane skill rolls. For each action spent in the casting process after the fi rst, the mage adds +1 to his arcane skill roll. The extra casting actions don’t have to be declared in ad-vance, but cannot exceed a number of actions equal to half the mage’s Smarts die.
While a heahwisard can spend an action focusing his magic and cast his spell in the same round, he sufers teh standard multi action penalty for doing so.
If the mage is disrupted while casting and fails his roll, or if he fails to spend an action each round reciting the incantation between starting and fi nishing, the spell automatically fails. The Siphoning does not affect mages who simply fail to invoke a spell, fortunately.
HEAHWISARD MAGE DUELING
Mages sometimes disagree. Sometimes they can re-solve their differences peacefully, other times they can-not. One way to settle a dispute or slur to one’s honor is with a mage duel. Aside from the manner in which mages fi ght, mage duels are akin to regular duels. Adolphus V crated the art of mage dueling after he returned from an expedition with a set of enchanted staffs that transformed all offensive magic within their boundaries to nonlethal. Despite the dangers of the Siphoning, Kings Adol-phus VI and VII have demanded that most disputes be handled via duels. They have proven so popular with younger heahwisards that regular tournaments are now held, much to the delight of the ordinary citizens.
THE BASIC LAWS A mage can initiate a duel with any member of the Magocracy, but not with priests, other forms of mage, or non-spellcasters. A mage may challenge any heahwisard regardless of social rank or sphere. However, a mage of higher status may appoint a champion in his place, as may a heahwisard of two or more spheres lower than the challenger. This saves high-ranking nobles from having to soil their hands with pointless duels insti-gated by upstarts, and prevents abuses of power by high sphere mages. Most mage duels are fought to submission. Falling un-conscious counts as submission. Mage duels of this nature must be fought in a sanctioned dueling fi eld. Mage duels to the death are the only other type of duel. This must be agreed-upon by both parties and the Mage-King. Such duels may be fought in any lo-cation, so long as innocents are not endangered. Mages wishing to duel must declare the time and place, and may appoint seconds. No heahwisard may be forced to duel unless he is fully fi t.
GAME RULES Mages may use any of the following spells during a duel, but may not cast spells before the duel be-gins nor have spells cast on them by others before or during the duel: Arcane resistance, armor, aura, blast, bolt, boost/lower trait, burst, defl ection, dis-pel, energy immunity, entangle, fatigue, fear, knock-down, prolonged blast, quickness, speed, sphere of might, stun, telekinesis. In a sanctioned dueling arena, all offensive spells in-fl ict nonlethal damage and have the trapping of “force,” which has no additional game mechanics. Spell Finesse and Augment Staff Edges function as normal. Both contestants begin 24” (48 yards) apart. Run the combat as normal until one mage cannot continue.
MAGIC
Example: A mage with Smarts d8 wants to cast ar-mor. If he casts it in a single action (as other spellcast-ers do), he has a –2 penalty. If he spends 4 additional actions casting, his maximum based on half his Smarts die, his fi nal modifi er is +2. In this instance, the mage would cast his spell on the fi fth round of combat (one round as normal, plus four additional rounds).
HRIMWISARDRY
Requirements: Novice Arcane Skill: Hrimwisardry (Smarts) Starting Powers: 2 Powers: Armor, aura, barrier, bladebreaker, blast,
bolt, bridge, burrow, burst, defl ection, detect/conceal, dispel, elemental form (coldfi re, slush, or ice only), energy immunity (cold, coldfi re, heat, fi re, or ice only), entangle, environmental protection (cold only), fatigue, invisibility, knockdown, obscure, prolonged blast, ref-uge, sanctuary, sluggish refl exes, smite, sphere of might, storm (blizzard only), stun, summon elemental (cold-fi re, ice, and slush only), voice on the wind, warding (creatures with Immunity or Resistance to cold only), whirlwind, wilderness step (ice and snow only).
Hrimwisards draw the very cold of the land through their bodies, converting it into mystical energy. Their constantly frigid skin gives them the benefi t of a perma-nent environmental protection (cold) spell, but they take +4 damage from heat and fi re attacks.
Though some hrimwisards have sided with the Hellfrost inhabitants, most are simply making the best of what nature has thrown at them. However, rumors and prejudices run deep, and all hrimwisards are treated with deep suspicion. They have –2 Charisma among the civilized races. In less law abiding realms, hrimwisards face being strung up as agents of the Hellfrost’s inhabit-ants.
Trappings: All hrimwisards’ spells must have a cold, coldfi re, or ice trapping.
Mechanics: Hrimwisards are more effective the colder it is, and receive a modifi er to their Hrimwisardry roll as per the table below.
CASTING MODIFIER TABLE
Temperature (F) Modifi er 33+ –1 32 to 13 +0 12 to –7 +1 –8 to –27 +2 –28 to –47 +4 –48 or lower +6
Backlash: Hrimwisards do not suffer from the Si-phoning. On a roll of 1 on his arcane skill die, regardless of Wild Die, he is Shaken and suffers a level of Fatigue, which is recovered after 30 minutes. (It is possible for a character to be Fatigued and yet cast his spell if his Wild Die is a success.)
HEAHWISARDRY SOCIAL STATUS
Heahwisards rank themselves by social position (such as Mage-Baron) and magical power, which they call a sphere. The Magocracy uses the standard Anari titles (p. 16), but adds the prefi x Mage- before each one. (Heah-wisards in training, regardless of their parents’ sta-tus, are given the title Mage-Apprentice.) However, the social titles differ slightly from the norm. In Anari society, a prince is the son of a king, but in the Magocracy the head of a major family takes the title Mage-Prince, there being no heredi-tary king. Instead, a Mage-King is appointed from the Mage-Princes every decade by the Council Elect (to which all nobles of Mage-Knight and above au-tomatically belong). According to ancient tradition, in order for the head of a house to become a Mage-Prince, he must own one of the master heahwisard staves (see Hellfrost Bestiary). To date, the magocratic families openly hold six of these relics, and thus there are only six Mage-Princes. These head the Ruling Houses. Heads of the other houses, known as Lesser Houses, are limited to the status of Mage-Duke or lower. Magical power within the Magocracy is judged by “sphere,” not social rank, which can be thrust upon an individual by the whims of fate. The First Sphere is the lowest rank and the Fifth Sphere the high-est. In game terms, a Novice heahwisard is a member of the First Sphere, a Seasoned heahwisard a Second Sphere mage, and so on through to becoming a mem-ber of the Fifth Sphere at Legendary. Unlike gaining so-cial titles, promotions through spheres are automatic when a character reaches the appropriate Rank. For NPCs, they typically have a d6 arcane skill and 3-5 spells as First Sphere mages. Increase the arcane skill die one step and add 1-3 spells for each ad-ditional sphere thereafter. Power Edges should be added as required. In order that an NPC’s sphere rating means some-thing to the heroes, sphere still equates to spell rank as per player characters, so a Second Sphere NPC (equivalent to a Seasoned PC) cannot have Veteran or Heroic spells. Note that a low sphere mage can still have a very high arcane skill die and lots of Pow-er Edges—he just won’t have any high Rank spells. Of course, a mage’s sphere isn’t as important as his social rank to most heahwisards. Who cares if a mage can teleport if he’s just a lowly Mage-Knight with no political clout?
NAMING Heahwisards list their name according to their so-cial title, given name, and sphere. Thus, a character might be introduced as Mage-Count Involex of the Third Sphere. Lying about one’s sphere to a fellow heahwisard is a serious breech of social etiquette.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
A critical failure results in a wound. Fatigue and dam-age is caused by the intense cold fl owing directly through the mage’s body. Environmental protection provides no defense.
RUNE MAGIC
Requirements: Novice, Frost Dwarf Arcane Skill: Special (Smarts) Starting Powers: 1 (one rune) Spell List: Special (see below). Rune magic is used only by the frost dwarves, though
it is recorded in dwarven texts that the ancient Saxa once knew the art, having discovered its form through their own endeavors. If this is true, such knowledge must be long spent, for only the oldest songs and poems make any reference to the art.
This ancient art uses carved runes as the focus for weaving magical threads into a cohesive spell. Rune mages do need to prepare special runes for each casting, and do so by scratching them onto objects.
Rune mages do not learn individual spells, but instead master the secret of individual runes. Each rune learned grants the mage three spells. The names of the runes and the spells that accompany them are detailed below.
Although there are 21 known runes, much spellcraft has been lost over the centuries. Even the most adept runes mages can now master only a handful of runes profi ciently.
The letter in parentheses is the Rank required to learn the rune. As long as he meets the rune’s Rank, the caster ignores individual spell Ranks. In some cases this means he can use individual spells slightly earlier than other wizards, but in some instances he must wait a little lon-ger before he can invoke them. Armor-Rune (S): armor, bladebreaker, weapon immu-
nity Arrow-Rune (N): aim, bolt, boost/lower trait (Shooting
and Throwing only) Battle-Rune (N): boost/lower trait (Battle only), gift of
battle, warrior’s gift Beast-Rune (S): beast friend, summon beast, viper
weapon Blessing-Rune (V): arcane resistance, fortune’s fa-
vored, luck/jinx Calming-Rune (S): becalm, bless/panic, slumber Change-Rune (S): ethereal/corporeal, growth/shrink,
shape change Charm-Rune (S): boost/lower (Persuasion and Street-
wise only), charismatic aura, puppet Coldfi re-Rune (S): burst (cold, coldfi re, or ice trapping
only), environmental protection (cold or heat only), sluggish refl exes
Curse-Rune (S): confusion, disease, fatigue Cut-Rune (N): boost/lower trait (Strength and Fighting
only), battle song, smite Dispel-Rune (V): dispel, negate arcana, silence Earth-Rune (S): bridge, burrow, quake Elemental Rune (V): elemental form, elemental ma-
nipulation, summon elemental Glow Rune (S): altered senses, heat mask, light Healing-Rune (N): boost/lower trait (Healing and Vigor
only), healing, succor Secret-Rune (S): detect/conceal, insight, invisibility Shield-Rune (N): barrier, defl ection, warding Tongue-Rune (N): grave speak, speak language, voice
on the wind Travel-Rune (S): quickness, speed, wilderness step Weather-Rune (S): fog cloud, storm, whirlwind
Skills: Rune magic does not have a single arcane skill. Instead, each rune’s name is a separate skill and must be increased separately. Thus, a mage who takes the armor-rune has the Armor-Rune skill. Through this skill he can invoke armor, bladebreaker, or weapon immunity.
A hero who learns a rune automatically gains a d4 in the appropriate skill. It is then increased using the regular rules for advancements.
Mechanics: In order to use a rune, it must be carved into an object, forming a magical focus. No focus means no arcane skill roll can be made.
MAGIC
Thus, when casting, the hero must have one hand available, a knife or other sharp object, and something on which to carve (fl esh is perfectly fi ne).
The hero decides which single power from the rune he wishes to invoke when he makes an appropriate ar-cane skill roll. Carving the rune requires just a few brief strokes, and is part of the arcane skill roll. Whether suc-cessful or failed, the rune fades once the arcane skill roll is made.
Edges: Rune mages can take the New Power Edge only once per Rank (or every 20 XPs after Legendary). This grants them a new rune, its three associated pow-ers, and d4 in the appropriate skill.
The initial rune learned when this Edge is taken counts as the hero’s sole rune for his current Rank. If he takes the arcane background during character generation, for example, the mage must wait until Seasoned before he may take a new rune.
A rune mage who wants to learn Alchemy must have at least one rune skill at a d6. However, he can only uti-lize spells for which his arcane skill is d6 or higher. For instance, a mage with Healing-Rune d8 and Travel-Rune d4 cannot use the Edge to create items containing quick-ness, speed, or wilderness step until his skill increases to a d6. The hero only need buy the Edge once—other rune skills can be used automatically once they meet the arcane skill die requirement.
To learn the Combine Spell Edge, a mage needs a d10 in a single rune skill (as well as the other requirements). The hero only need buy the Edge once—other rune skills can be used automatically once they meet the arcane skill die requirement. Thus, a mage with Armor-Rune d10 and Cut-Rune d8 can combine any two spells from armor, bladebreaker, and weapon immunity but none of the Cut-Rune spells until his skill increases to a d10.
When combining spells from two runes with different die types, use the lower skill die to cast the spell. For instance, if our hero increased his skills to Armor-Rune d12 and Cut-Rune d10, he could combine armor and smite, but would roll a d10.
SONG MAGIC
Requirements: Novice Arcane Skill: Song Magic (Smarts) Starting Powers: 3 Spell List: Arcane resistance, banish, battle song, beast
friend, bless/panic, boost/lower trait, charismatic aura, confusion, detect/conceal, dispel, elemental manipula-tion, fatigue, fear, healing, lock/unlock, mimic, negate arcana, nightmare, puppet, sanctuary, silence, slumber, speak language, stun, succor, summon beast, voice on the wind, warding, warrior’s gift, wilderness step.
Song mages, more correctly known as skalds, are sor-cerers who work their magic through the power of song. The art is extremely ancient and found among all races, though Anari skalds became rare after they began writing down their epic tales.
As well as being spellcasters, skalds are also storytell-
ers and poets, able to recount epic poems and stories from memory. Some play instruments, but most simply use their voice to enthrall their audience. Their talents make them popular guests. Finding a warm place to sleep and a hot meal usually requires nothing more than a tale to entertain the host.
A skald learns special techniques for memorizing things he has heard or read, and he is well versed in many topics. They have +1 to all Common Knowledge rolls, as well as Knowledge rolls relating to riddles, his-tory, folklore, and such like. Agility is used to play an instrument, bards being conversant in most forms.
Skalds are also popular with nobility and commoners alike and receive +1 Charisma.
Casting: Skalds must be able to speak to work their magic, but don’t need to use their hands. Once the spell is cast, the skald may stop singing, even if the spell is to be Maintained.
SKALDS & LEADERSHIP EDGES
Many Saxa skalds accompany armies onto the bat-tlefi eld, singing songs of valor and heroes of old to inspire the men around them. In game terms, such abilities are handled through Leadership Edges with a singing or poetry trapping.
KENNINGS
Kennings are poetic expressions designed to re-place a more mundane word or words. Skalds make great use of them in their poems and songs, fi nding they impart instant mental images in the minds of their listeners. Here are some examples. Players are encouraged to create their own colorful kennings. Arrows: wound-bees, stinging rain, Ullr’s tears. Battle: spear-din, mass of weapons, raven feast. Blood: slaughter dew, corpse milk, Scaetha’s tears. Corpse: wolf-meal, wolf-feast (multiple corpses), raven-harvest. Drinking horn: aurochs’ spear, mead ship. Fire: foe of metal, Thrym’s-bane, Kenaz’s tongue. Gold: Sigel’s tears or blood. King: giver of rings. Lie: Nauthiz’s-truth. Mead: tongue-loosener, golden tongue. Sea: whale’s way, the blue road. Serpent: heather fi sh, land fi sh. Shield: sword-blocker. Silver: Maera’s glint, liquid cloud, ice. Sky: Thunor’s bowl. Warrior: raven-feeder, sword shaker. Waves: Neorthe’s daughters or horses. Wife: key keeper ( Saxa women hold the keys to the stores). Wind: tree-bender, cloud-enemy. Wounds: footprint of swords, sword trail.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
ACTIVATING MAGIC ITEMS
There are three types of magic items in Hellfrost—al-chemical devices, such as potions and scrolls, hedge magic items, which take the form of herbal potions, and true relics, the most powerful of the three sorts. Each has a specifi c method of activation.
ALCHEMICAL DEVICES
Alchemical devices are magical creations. Any sentient
creature who touches one instantly realizes it is a thing of power. He learns the item’s power and how to wield it in an instant.
All he must do to actually use the spell it contains is follow any instructions, such as drink a benefi cial potion, point a wand at a foe, or read a scroll (unless he is Illiter-ate). The Alchemy Edge (p. 25) explains the workings of an alchemical device.
HEDGE MAGIC
Items created through these arts are not true relics.
They cannot be detected as magic items by touch (though detect spells work normally) nor does a user have to at-tune them (see Legendary Relics below).
A Knowledge (Alchemy) roll and a few minutes of time
are required to learn the properties of unlabeled hedge magic items. Only on a critical failure does studying an herbal brew become dangerous. In this instance, the brew is mistaken for another sort, determined by the GM. While few herbal remedies are fatal in and of themselves, some have side-effects if multiple doses are taken.
An herbal brew bestows its benefi ts if rubbed on skin, smoked, drunk, or whatever else the concoction requires to work.
LEGENDARY RELICS
Legendary relics, also known as
permanent relics, are the rarest magic items in Rassilon. These are the magic boots of stealth, wands of fi reballs, hardened armor, weapons which un-erringly strike foes, and so on. Their powers are not unlimited, however, and even the mightiest weapon may only grant a bonus to hit and contain an appropriate Edge.
The art of creating them was lost eons ago, and even the long-lived elves and industrious dwarves have forgotten the craft, except in the form of fables and myths. As such, legend-ary relics are highly sought after, not least by the Reliquary.
A quick system for creating relics is presented in the Hellfrost Bestiary. Published adventures will include the game mechanics of any legendary relic they introduce to the game world.
Touching a legendary relic immedi-ately reveals it to be an item of power. Only those completely cut off from the threads of magic lack the ability to sense relics. Even animals know the item is special, though they cannot
attune to its powers. They wielder doesn’t suddenly gain knowledge of
its specifi c powers, however. Learning these requires casting detect arcana, use of a special ability, like the Arcanologist Edge, or attuning.
A hero who wishes to wield a magic item and benefi t from its power must fi rst attune himself.
In game terms, if the device is usable by the hero, he may spend a benny to learn and access a magic item’s abilities and bonuses. If another character wishes to use the item, he must spend a benny to access its abilities as well. No benny, no magical powers. Once the item is attuned, the character instantly knows all its powers and benefi ts.
A character who cannot use the device for some reason cannot learn the device’s powers and does not “waste” a benny trying. A ring that grants a bonus to Hrimwisardry rolls, for instance, remains a mysterious but obviously magical relic to a warrior with no Arcane Background.
Rassilon has many gods and goddesses, though fewer than in ancient days. Far back in history, in a time before even the elves and dwarves were as children, the God War shook the very fabric of the universe. What started the war has been lost to the countless eons of time that have since passed, but legends and tales speak of a titanic struggle that ripped the stars from the heavens.
Unwilling to fi ght for survival purely with their own power, many gods of similar nature bonded together into gestalt entities of greater power. Thus where once there were gods of fi re, hearths, and volcanoes, there is now only a single god of fi re, for example, though the sun remains a separate aspect.
THE COMPACT
Following the God War, the deities created the Com-
pact, a set of rules that would ensure no future war between the gods would occur. The basics of the Com-pact were extremely simple—no god or goddess could directly attack another god, and no deity could directly interfere with the mortal realm, aside from granting spells and small favors to mortals.
The dark gods quickly found a loophole, and extolled their followers to attack the mortal followers of the good gods. Although war in heaven has been avoided, the mor-tal realm has been a battleground between rival faiths.
HELA’S MADNESS
Hela, the goddess of undeath, once guarded the gates
of the Abyss and judged souls. A little over six centuries ago, just before the Blizzard War, Hela went insane. May-be countless eons of only dealing with the dead drove her mad, or perhaps powerful demons from the lower Abyss had slowly corrupted her. Whatever the reason, Hela threw open the gates of the Abyss.
A fl ood of souls, of those judged sinful and sentenced to an eternity in the Abyss, poured out of the gates while Hela watched and laughed. Across the gap between
life and death they fl ew, fi nding their way to the mor-tal realm. Here they sought out and inhabited ancient corpses of dead heroes and kings, soldiers and clerics, merchants and commoners. One by one, the dead began to rise. Where once tombs and barrows had been places of quiet refl ection on lives long spent, they now become places the living feared to tread. Although the Withered Lands contain the greatest number of undead, they can be found across Rassilon.
Fortunately for mortals, the demon lords were too slow in detecting the exodus, and by the time they reached the gates they found them shut once again, Hela fl ed in self-imposed exile, and Scaetha glaring at them through her helmet visor, her runic sword thrumming in her mailed hand.
THE COMPACT BROKEN
The gods are not omnipotent. They are extremely
powerful entities, far beyond the comprehension of mortals, but each is responsible for only a small aspect of the universe, and is relatively clueless about matters beyond their spheres of interest. Even they have little clue about the cause of the Blizzard War.
Kenaz and Sigel, the gods of fi re and sun respectively, have disappeared, apparently vanished shortly after the Blizzard War began. Their clerics still receive spells, since these are as much drawn from the god’s home realm as from the deity in person, but they are weaker in colder regions, a clear sign all is not well in the heavens. Only Rigr, the Watchman of the Gods, has bothered search-ing for them, and he has found no trace of his missing brethren among the stars. Though he would like to turn his gaze to earth, this act, despite being extremely trivial, would violate the Compact, and give the dark gods the excuse they need to throw their weight directly behind their mortal followers.
The gods of good are currently locked in debate as to whether Thrym, considered an extremely minor deity until fi ve centuries ago, has broken the Compact. The god
RELIGION
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
of winter claims the growth of the Hellfrost is a natural occurrence, a result of the sun and fi re gods neglecting their duties, but others insist the disappearance of two gods and the Hellfrost expansion could only have come about by divine will, and thus broke the Compact.
Unfortunately, Thrym has grown in power as the Hell-frost expands, and is now strong enough to single-hand-edly take on the other gods combined, were the other gods inclined to band together. Scaetha and Tiw, the gods of war, are overseeing the mortal battles against the forces of Dargar, god of slaughter, and Hela, goddess of the undead, and have little interest in the Hellfrost. Eira the Peacemaker insists diplomacy is the best course of ac-tion, while the others have yet to make up their minds.
So for now, the gods of good bide their time, and aid mortals in accordance with the Compact, waiting, argu-ing, over what to do next.
PATRON DEITIES
A patron deity is one to which a mortal devotes his entire religious life. Most folk don’t go this far, and are happy to switch gods as the need arises. A farmer, for instance, usually prays to Eostre, goddess of farming. However, he may also pray to Thunor, god of weather, so his crops get enough rain, Vali, the famine lord, to keep away blight, Sigel, the sun god, to provide a good sum-mer for growing, and so on. Such activity is considered the norm in the Hearthlands.
However, most mortals do have a favored god, who acts as their patron after death (assuming they haven’t offended him in the meanwhile).
Clergy must pick a patron deity, and while not for-bidden from giving worship to other gods, most deities treat this as a sin. (This sin is common and variable, and therefore not included in lists later in this chapter.)
Praying to a god whose aspects relate directly to a task, and where the gods have a natural crossover, is at worst a minor sin, and may even be overlooked by the deity. A cleric of Kenaz (god of fi re) praying to Ertha (god of earth and smiths) when forging a new sword likely incurs no sin as it’s hard to make a sword without us-ing metal and smithing skills. If a cleric of Eira, goddess of healing, prayed to Vali, even to help in removing a plague, she would likely suffer a major sin, as any prayer to a deity strengthens him.
The GM should use his knowledge of the gods and common sense when deciding when a sin occurs through cross-worship.
CHANGING PATRON DEITY
Lay members can change deity without much regard for mortal consequences. A few gods are jealous enough to speak out against the mortal when his soul is judged, but most accept that mortals were given free will and have the right to exercise it.
Clergy, on the other hand, have taken an eternal oath to serve their god, and breaking it is not without punish-ment. Even gods with similar ideals, such as Kenaz and Sigel, look poorly on clerics who change faith.
A character with the Arcane Background (Miracles) Edge who changes patron god loses the Edge, along with any other Edges relating to it, such as Champion, his Disciple Edge (see below), New Powers, and so on. At the GM’s discretion, the character may pick the Arcane Background (Miracles) Edge again, but he does not re-gain any other Edges he lost. These must be retaken with advancements, as normal.
Depending on why the hero lost his faith, the deity may send furies (see Hellfrost Bestiary) to torment him. Such torment usually lasts until the hero makes peace with his former patron (typically through a quest which aids the god) or fi nds a new patron to protect him.
BEYOND DEATH
Every mortal being dies at some point. Creatures like
demons and divine heralds are mortal, but have no souls. When they die, their essence fl ows back into whatever realm they usually inhabit, to be reformed. Constructs are totally soulless and simply cease to exist on death.
When a mortal dies, his soul leaves his body within a few days and is taken by heralds of Scaetha to Scaetha’s Hall, the waiting room of the dead. Good or evil, young or old, all souls arrive there. Rarely, a soul is so trauma-tized by the loss of its physical form that it remains in the mortal realm as a ghost, unable to fi nd solace among mortals or eternal salvation in the afterlife.
Scaetha weighs the souls against the sins they com-mitted in life, looks at how they spent their mortal life, and hears testimony from divine heralds of the gods they worshipped. Hothar sometimes aids Scaetha in judging souls, but he can only advise the lady of death.
After weighing, Scaetha pronounces judgment on the soul. Those with a patron deity who lived according to their god’s tenets, good or evil, are released into the care of the divine heralds of their god, who lead them to their respective afterlife. The Hall of Echoing Screams awaits those found wanting. All mortals who die without a pa-tron deity are automatically sent to the Hall.
The Hall is an auction house for souls, where demons, dark heralds, and sometimes heralds of the good gods, bid on unclaimed souls. Sometimes a good god will save a soul, but in most cases the soul is won by a darker power, such as a demon lord. (Exactly what the great powers use to bid with is unknown to mortals.)
The fate of such souls varies, but without a patron, a large portion end up as demonic soldiers, forced to wage eternal war on behalf of their master.
THE ABYSS
In times past, the Abyss was known as Hel, in honor of the goddess who guarded its mighty gates. Today, few clerics, including those of Hela, use the name—most
RELIGION
clergy curse her name and even her own priests prefer to ignore the fact she was once a servant of the other gods.
According to common theology, the Abyss has always existed. It is a place of raw chaos, a leftover from the creation of the universe. Some say once there was only a single supreme god, who threw all the negative aspects of the universe into one place, so intent was he (or maybe she) on creating perfection. None can say for sure, and few clerics waste time theorizing on the matter.
The Abyss is spoken of as a place of eternal torment, though its geography and punishments vary upon who is warning you of its perils. Clerics of Eostre speak of barren wastes and thin soil where nothing grows and of lost souls who futilely till the ground. Paladins of Freo speak of endless roads that lead nowhere or wind round in circles, of journeys with no purpose and nothing new to see. Only Hela’s clerics have no version of the Abyss, for they know that all souls who follow her in life will continue to serve her in undeath.
Inhabiting the Abyss are demons and tormented souls. Much has been written and even more knowledge lost on the nature of demons, but few mortals doubt they ex-ist. Those who dwell in the Abyss cannot escape without the intervention of a deity. For this reason, no mage can call demons to the mortal realm. Even the evil gods place strict limits on which demons can be called.
According to scholars, the Abyss is ruled over by pow-erful demon lords. To date, no evidence that these crea-tures can visit the mortal realms has been uncovered, and most folk would prefer scholars keep their noses out of such matters.
NECROMANCY
Until Hela’s madness there were very few undead in Rassilon. Those that existed were revenants, souls re-leased by the gods to perform a task they had left undone in life and quickly reclaimed after completing their goal.
Following the betrayal of her duty, tens of thousands of fell spirits found homes in ancient corpses, and clerics devoted to Hela’s new aspects gained the unholy power of necromancy. Those souls who did not fi nd corporeal homes vanished from the sight of the other gods.
How Hela managed this is unknown even to the other gods, but scholars and clerics suspect she realized the other gods would quickly act against her, so she sent the majority of souls to a dark domain, far from their gaze.
Common belief is that Hela’s clerics draw forth the spirits from this secret realm to inhabit corpses. It is certainly true that although countless undead were awakened shortly after the gates were fl ung open, the number of souls which escaped far exceeded the num-ber of animated corpses created.
Only gravespeak allows a mortal to contact a depart-ed soul, and then only because the gods have agreed to allow this. Souls within the Abyss cannot be contacted. The spell is not fl awless, for sometimes Hela intercepts the magical connection between mortal and soul, and redirects it to one of her dark souls.
THE GODS OF RASSILON
All clerics receive the Arcane Background (Miracles) Edge, but each is slightly different to the version in the core rules, depending on the deity they follow. Every de-ity characters can follow in Hellfrost is listed below by its common name, along with a stat block of relevance to priestly characters. Each entry is explained below.
Name: Deities have a common name, the one most used by followers and unbelievers alike.
Titles: The gods go by many titles, a legacy of their former individual status and their current gestalt exis-tence. Any of the names can be freely used by clergy or lay members without risking offense to the deity.
Aspects: Every god controls only a small number of spheres. Within these spheres, the god is unchallenged, but they have little or no power over other aspects.
Symbol: The symbol carried by clerics and lay mem-bers, engraved on temple property, adorning raiments, and such like.
Priesthood: All gods have two types of priesthood, one spiritual (priests) and one militant (paladins). To-gether they are known as clergy or clerics, respectively. A hero choosing the Arcane Background (Miracles) Edge must decide which branch he belongs to. Priests may take the Holy Warrior Edge but not Champion. Paladins may take the Champion Edge but not Holy Warrior.
A hero may switch between being a cleric and paladin by spending an advancement opportunity, but loses any Champion or Holy Warrior Edge, as applicable. If he switches back, he must take the Edge again—he does not automatically regain its use.
Herald: A description of the deity’s herald, divine messengers who visit the mortal realm as proxies. See the Hellfrost Bestiary for stats.
Holy Day: The day or days on which lay members make offerings to the god. Clergy are expected to honor these days, regardless of their situation.
Duties: Details the basic tenets of the faith and the sorts of activities clergy are supposed to engage in on a daily basis on behalf of their deity.
Sins: As detailed in the Savage Worlds rules, clerics must obey the tenets of their faith or risk losing their magic. Each deity has its better-known sins listed for the benefi t of priestly characters. GMs are encouraged to work with their players to come up with others. Sins should be strictly enforced.
Signature Power: Every deity has a signature power. The cleric automatically gains and can use this spell when he takes the Arcane Background (Miracles) Edge, regardless of its normal Rank requirements.
Powers: The other powers available to followers of the deity with the Arcane Background (Miracles) Edge. Spells not in this list cannot be learned by the character.
Trappings: Provides a basic guide to the sorts of trap-pings clergy can use. GMs and players are encouraged to use common sense when applying trappings. For
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
instance, while a cleric of Kenaz might apply a fi re trap-ping to his leaping spell, it doesn’t mean he catches fi re. Rather, he may leave behind a brief fi ery trail while he jumps, or his feet are swathed in non-damaging fl ames as he leaps.
Special: Any special notes relating to character gen-eration.
Notes: This text block provides a brief description of the deity, as envisioned by his followers, plus any addi-tional notes about the god, notes on temples and shrines of the faith, the roles of the two branches of the clergy, a brief summation of the form ceremonies and festivals take, and any additional information.
MINOR DEITIES
Titles: Varies by deity. Aspects: One very specifi c aspect, such as cattle
stealing, sunrise, coinage, a single geographic feature (a mountain or tree), and so on.
Symbol: Varies by deity. Priesthood: Varies by deity (priests); Varies by deity
(paladins). Herald: None. Holy Days: Varies by deity. Duties: Varies by deity, but related to his aspect. Sins: The player and GM should decide two or three
Minor sins, one or two Major sins, and one Mortal sin for the deity.
Signature Power: Chosen by the GM as appropriate to the faith. The signature spell cannot be higher than Seasoned.
Powers: A lesser deity’s powers list should comprise no more than four Novice spells, two Seasoned spells, and one Veteran spell appropriate to the god’s aspect. The GM and player should work together to decide the spells.
Trappings: Decided by GM and player as appropriate to the faith.
Disciple Edge: Lesser deities do not grant followers a Disciple Edge.
Special: Clerics of lesser deities do not gain a free Connections Edge, but neither do they have the Orders Hindrance. Temples to lesser deities are less organized.
The stat block for the lesser deities is somewhat lack-ing in detail. There are several reasons for that. First, there are literally hundreds of lesser gods, many of whom share common features with only one or two very minor differences. Vestri, god of the west wind, for instance, will have an almost identical stat block to Austri, god of the east wind.
Second, lesser gods make a great GM tool. If the GM wants an adventure involving a small sect, he can make up the details to fi t without worrying whether or not it fi ts the canonical view of a major deity.
Third, they are a great tool for players who maybe want a few spells, but without all the roleplaying “problems” that can come with being part of a major organization. Working in tandem with the GM, a player can create a
god of anything he wants, so long as it is very specifi c and meets with GM approval. Birds, for instance, is too wide a category, as is mountains. A hero would have to choose one specifi c species of bird or one specifi c mountain for his god to lord over.
When choosing the powers list for a lesser deity, the GM should narrow spells as far as possible. Austri may grant burst with an air trapping for instance, but if he allows summon elemental, it should be restricted purely to air elementals. Narrow scope is the price one pays for worshipping a lesser god.
At the end of the day, a lesser god should not come close to rivaling any of the major gods detailed below. Most of these lesser gods are merely aspects of the major gods, are already part of the major deities’ stat blocks, and are worshipped alongside the major god. Austri, for instance, receives praise whenever a priestess of Thunor, god of wind, faces east to cast a spell or pray. As such, using lesser gods is optional, and the fi nal decision as to whether they are allowed is in the hands of the GM, not the players.
DARGAR
Titles: Scourge of the Weak, Eater of the Dead, Lord
of Terror, Screamer in the Dark, He Who Strengthens Through Adversity, the Defi ler.
Aspects: Slaughter, senseless violence, massacres, cannibalism, orcs, goblins.
Symbol: A blindfolded, severed head with a bite mark taken out of the skull.
Priesthood: Hounds (priests); Wolves (paladins). Herald: Dargar’s heralds are the same as Tiw’s. Holy Days: None. Celebrations are held after the suc-
cessful completion of an act of barbarity. Duties: To bathe in the blood of other creatures, to
cleanse society of the weak, to strengthen others through confrontation.
Sins: (Minor) not eating sentient fl esh once a week, being beaten by a lesser foe; (Major) leaving survivors, eating vegetable matter more than once a month; (Mor-tal) avoiding bloodshed, showing mercy.
Signature Power: Smite. Powers: Armor, battle song, blast, bolt, boost/lower
trait (Strength, Vigor, Fighting, Shooting, and Throwing only), burst, champion of the faith, energy immunity, gift of battle, prolonged blast, quickness, sanctuary, sphere of might, summon demon (chain, demonic sol-dier, lasher, spined, steed only), summon herald, war-rior’s gift, weapon immunity.
Trappings: Any, except necromantic ones. Dargar is the son of Tiw, but is far more bloodthirsty
than his father. Whereas Tiw revels in battle for the sake of battle, Dargar is the patron of senseless violence and bloody slaughter. Few of the civilized races worship him. Dargar is typically shown as a fearsome warrior bedecked in grisly trophies and covered in blood.
His temples are always located in out of the way plac-es, often underground, and bedecked in grisly trophies
RELIGION
taken from victims. As well as severed heads and limbs, it is not unusual to fi nd fl ayed corpses hanging from the ceiling, or eviscerated bodies manacled to walls. Clergy usually carry small trophies, such as hands, ears, and tongues on their person.
Dargar’s temples are not allied to each other. Unless a crusade has been called for, temples view each other as rivals for Dargar’s blessing. Thus, members are as likely to war against each other, as they are outsiders.
Dargar’s clergy preach that their god is not a foe of the civilized races, but is rather an ally, culling the weak who hold back the races from growing to their true potential, and ensuring that only the strongest survive to breed. Mercy, they say, is for the weak.
Priests are usually torturers or war leaders, whereas paladins are remorseless killers, slaughtering all whom cross their path. The cult is universally outlawed in civilized lands, and adherents can expect the courts to use their own philosophy of “mercy is for the weak” against them by summarily executing members.
Most festivals to the god of slaugh-ter involve torture, death, and the eat-ing of the victims’ fl esh. Sometimes, victims are made to slaughter each other in grisly gladiatorial events. Those who survive have the “honor” of being eaten alive.
EIRA
Titles: Mother of Life, Great Heal-
er, Woundbinder, Peacemaker, the Outstretched Hand, Troublesoother.
Aspects: Healing, life, mercy, peace.
Symbol: A raised hand, palm forward.
Priesthood: Merciful Sons/ Daughters (priests); Peacekeepers (paladins).
Herald: A white-robed fi gure. Holy Days: Raestdaeg. Duties: To help those in need (not including obvi-
ously evil creatures like undead or demons), to promote peace.
Sins: (Minor) infl icting a wound on a creature when other options were available, refusing to heal a good per-son in need, promoting violence through word, deed, or inaction; (Major) taking the life of a living creature, causing sickness or disease; (Mortal) willfully taking the life of a defenseless creature.
Signature Power: Healing. Powers: Arcane resistance, beast friend, bladebreak-
er, bless/panic (bless only), bodyguard, boost/lower trait (Vigor, Healing, and Persuasion only), champion of the faith, confusion, dispel, energy immunity, environmen-
tal protection, feast, glyph, greater healing, knockdown, refuge, regenerate, sanctuary, slumber, stun, succor, summon herald, warding, weapon immunity.
Trappings: Clergy must never use a trapping that infl icts harm on others, such as acid, electricity, fi re, and such like. They cannot take necromantic trappings.
Goddess of healing, Eira is Tiw’s ex-wife. When she married Tiw, she thought her diplomatic ways and words of peace could calm her warlike husband, but she quickly realized she fought a lost cause. Eira is the patron of bar-bers, doctors, healers, herbalists, and surgeons, as well as diplomats and peacemakers. Statues of her depict a young maiden with her hands palm upward in a gesture of peace.
Shrines to her glory can be found in every establish-ment related to healing. Often the shrine takes the form of a holy symbol. Temples exist only in major settle-ments. They act as hospitals, as well as fl ophouses and soup kitchens for the dregs of society.
Priests spend their time healing and caring for the sick, whether that be at temples or shrines or as itiner-ant healers and herbalists. They also serve as diplomats, ever-seeking peaceful solutions to the problems which beset Rassilon. The Peacekeepers serve as bodyguards to the healers and also undertake expeditions to carry medical supplies to distant communities and gather rare healing herbs.
Despite their mainly pacifi stic ways, the clergy are
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
at odds with the Sisters of Mercy, who practice healing without honoring Eira. Strangely, Eira has yet to take any direct action against these “charlatans.”
Festivals typically involve burning fragrant medicinal herbs as well as singing. During these celebrations, the sick and infi rm of the local community are invited to at-tend, for it is believed that Eira blesses and cures those who revere her.
EOSTRE
Titles: Plantmother, Animalmother, Allmother, Green
Goddess, Nurturer, Protector of the Wild, Bountiful One, Harvestmother, Barley Queen, Provider of Bread.
Aspects: Animals, plants, cycle of life, fertility, birth. Symbol: A bear’s paw holding an oak tree. Priesthood: Eostre has two sets of clerics, known as
the Sowers (for her plant aspect) and Husbanders (for her animal aspect). The Reapers are her sole paladin order.
Herald: A humanoid fi gure, covered in bark and with the paws, tail, and head of various animals all merged together.
Holy Day: Milcdaeg. The fi rst Heafoddaeg of Plohmo-nan, Sowanmonan, Sceranmonan, and Hegmonan are also holy days, as is Sangdaeg of Haerfestmonan. There is a single high holy day held on the fi rst day of spring, though the date changes each year, depending on when spring is declared to have started.
Duties: To care for the plants and animals, to tend nature, to ensure a balance between civilization and wilderness.
Sins: (Minor) eating fi sh or meat more than three times a week except when facing starvation, allowing acts of cruelty against defenseless animals, mistreating an animal, wearing fur from a beast that did not die of natural causes; (Major) hunting for sport or cruelty, tor-turing wild animals; (Mortal) willfully destroying crops (harvesting does not count) or burning forests.
Signature Power: Beast friend (Husbander or Reap-er) or entangle (Sower or Reaper). The other may be learned normally.
Powers: Altered senses, animate war tree, barrier, beast friend, bolt, boost/lower trait, bridge, burrow, champion of the faith, elemental manipulation (earth only), entangle, environmental protection, farsight, feast, glyph, growth/shrink, healing, leaping, mend, refuge, sanctuary, shape change, sentry, summon beast, summon elemental (wood), summon herald, wall of might, wall walker, wandering senses, wilderness step.
Trappings: Clergy must use a trapping related to plants or animals were appropriate.
Daughter of Ertha, Eostre is the goddess of animals and plants and of fertility and birth. She takes two forms.
The fi rst is a matronly woman surrounded by animals. The second is also a matronly woman, but with vines wrapping around her legs and stalks of wheat and barley for hair. Both statues are always carved from wood taken
from trees which fell naturally (as opposed to being cut or pulled down).
Large communities have a temple dedicated to Eo-stre, which serves as a veterinary practice and midwifery (though Eira’s temples also serve the latter function). Shrines can be found in all farming communities and usually take the form of engraved standing stones, which act as fi eld boundaries. Her holy symbol is often engraved above granaries as a deterrent to rats and other vermin (animals that don’t fall under her protection).
Her priests are divided into two main sects, the Sow-ers, who are responsible for plants, and the Husbanders, who watch over animals. These sects are further divided into the Cultivators and Wilders.
Cultivators are responsible for blessing the crops and livestock in their communities, helping to gather the harvest, healing sick animals, making bread, and such like. Wilders are more separated from the popu-lace, tending remote areas and ensuring vile creatures like orcs do not ravage the woods, and hunters do not kill more than their share. All her clergy are usually on good terms with elves and druids, as well as many ertha elementalists.
Her paladins, the Reapers, are militant versions of her clerics, sworn to protect the wild from deprivation. They also serve as hunters in remote communities, ensuring the balance between need and want is kept.
Festivals always involve sacrifi ces. Typically these are cuts of meat and fruit and vegetables. After being blessed, the sacrifi ces are handed out among the congregation and eaten as part of a religious feast.
ERTHA
Titles: Earthmother, Groundshaker, Mastersmith,
the Celestial Smith, Forgemistress, Dvergmother, Dark-mother.
Aspects: Earth, metal, gems, crafting, smithing, un-derground warfare, subterranean realms.
Symbol: A hammer with a multi-faceted gem as the head.
Priesthood: Forge Sons/Daughters (priests); Stone-hands (paladins)
Herald: A larger than normal frost dwarf. Holy Day: The fi rst day of each Deorcmonan phase.
Festivals are usually held at the start of Plohmonan and Werremonan, when smiths are busy making and repair-ing farming tools and weapons respectively.
Duties: To explore the subterranean realm, to use metal wisely, to ensure metal and gems are returned to the earth.
Sins: (Minor) swimming or using a boat when it can be avoided, washing more than once a week, using non-metal weapons or armor, harming a frost dwarf; (Major) not returning at least 200 gs of metal or gems to the earth each year, sleeping outdoors when there is a cave or dwelling nearby; (Mortal) willfully despoiling a cavern or other underground feature, cremating a corpse (un-dead and trolls don’t count).
RELIGION
Signature Power: Burrow. Powers: Armor, barrier, beast friend (land creatures
only), bladebreaker, bolt, boost/lower trait (Strength, Vigor, Climbing, and Knowledge (smithing) only), bridge, champion of the faith, detect/conceal (metals and gems only), elemental form (earth only), elemental manipula-tion (earth only), energy immunity (air and earth only), entangle, environmental protection, ethereal/corporeal (no ethereal), glyph, growth/shrink, quake, refuge, sanc-tuary, sphere of might, summon elemental (earth, mud, or sand only), summon herald, wall walker, weapon immunity, wilderness step.
Trappings: Clergy must use a darkness or earth trap-ping where appropriate. They cannot take air or necro-mantic trappings.
Ertha is the patron god of the frost dwarves, as well as smiths, certain crafters (those using rock, clay, or gems, mainly), and miners. Where Eostre governs the upper world, Ertha controls the dark depths of the earth. Hu-mans depict her as a muscular woman carrying a large hammer. Frost dwarf representations show a female dwarf of advanced age. Statues are always carved from stone and often decorated with precious gems.
Her temples are always underground, preferably in natural caverns. When worked, they are constructed to blend into the natural curves of the rock. Altars are usu-ally made of rock, polished to a fi ne hue to bring out every vein of color. As well as being places of worship, they also serve as workshops for smiths and jewelers. Surface smithies and jewelers’ workshops often have a holy symbol engraved above the door or on tools.
Ertha’s priests see themselves as farmers of the earth. Each year, a portion of all the gems and metals mined in the region are returned to the nearest temple and depos-ited into a deep crevasse, in the belief that, as with crops, some of the crop must be used to ensure a good harvest the following year. Greedy merchants and thieves who hoard coins are among their enemies, for removing too much metal weakens the earth for future generations.
Paladins of the faith act as guards for miners and sub-terranean explorers, and are often engaged in leading forays against goblin and orc lairs.
Festivals are held underground or in windowless rooms. Only a single candle is allowed for illumination. Music, formed by striking hammers against anvils or rock, forms an integral part of festivals. Tunes vary immensely, depending on the nature of the ceremony, but there is always a slow, deep beat, “the heartbeat of the world.”
Clergy hold that gems and precious metals grow in the earth as seeds grow in the soil. As such, clergy regu-larly throw coins, weapons, pots, gems, and such like into deep holes, believing the sacrifi ces will grow into new deposits elsewhere beneath the earth. Typically this is done during festivals.
Worshippers seeking her blessing write prayers onto small stone tablets (sold for 1 gs each at temples), which are then thrown into deep crevasses. If the worshipper can hear the tablet hit the bottom, the goddess has re-jected the plea.
FREO
Titles: The Voyager, Farseeker, Wideranger, the Rest-
less One. Aspects: Travel, wanderlust, wilderness. Symbol: A wheel with a sail attached to the top and a
sandal at the bottom. Priesthood: Wheels (priests); Sandals (paladins) Herald: A humanoid with four legs and four faces,
each pointing in a different direction. Holy Day: None. Worshippers treat any day a journey
begins or ends as a holy day. Duties: To explore the world, to spread news of dis-
tant locales, to protect travelers. Sins: (Minor) not giving hospitality to a fellow trav-
eler, owning a slave, staying in one place for more than a month, not leaving used shoes at a shrine or giving them to someone in need once per month; (Major) destroying maps or erasing signposts, misdirecting a traveler, living in the same place for more than a season; (Mortal) living in the same place for more than a year, buying property.
Signature Power: Wilderness step. Powers: Beast friend, bodyguard, bolt, boost/lower
trait (Agility, Vigor, Boating, Climbing, Riding, Survival, and Swimming only), bridge, champion of the faith, en-tangle, environmental protection, ethereal/corporeal (no corporeal), farsight, feast, fl y, leaping, mend, quickness, sanctuary, sentry, speak language, speed, storm (dispel aspect only), succor, summon herald, teleport, voice on the wind, wall walker, wandering senses, zephyr.
Trappings: Clergy may use any trapping except nec-romantic.
Freo is depicted as a four-headed man with four legs, each pointing in a different direction. He is a celestial wanderer, never content to stay in one place for long. Comets are seen as signs that Freo is beginning another of his lengthy voyages through the heavens.
Freo has few regular worshippers, though, like Thu-nor, all those undertaking a voyage pay homage to him. His clergy are drawn to travel and exploration, rarely staying in one place for more than a few weeks, lest they offend their patron.
There are no temples to Freo, though shrines can be found in most inns and on wharves. His symbol is often scratched onto the bottom of sandals or on the side of wagons, and it is not unusual to see the symbol embla-zoned on sails or fl ying from ship’s masts. Most travel towers contain a shrine.
While the priests of Freo are explorers and travelers, drifting across the land in search of new wonders, new routes, and new peoples to encounter, his paladins of-fer their services as guards to merchants, explorers, and adventuring parties, protecting them through the wilder-ness. Most are on good terms with the Iron Guild and the Roadwardens, both of whom occupy a similar role in society.
Organized festivals to Freo are extremely rare. Typi-cally, the sights and sounds a traveler hears and the tales he tells of his journey are celebrations of Freo’s aspects.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
However, there is one practice common among his clergy that has become a personal act of celebration.
All clergy are expected to change their shoes or boots regularly, giving their old ones to a person in need. According to the teachings, anyone who is freely given footwear worn by a cleric of Freo will have safe travel for a month. At many remote shrines, collections of old boots and shoes can be found piled together, waiting for someone to take a pair (footwear at regularly visited shrines vanishes quickly).
HELA
Titles: The Black Queen, Supreme Necromancer,
Lady of Decay, the Unholy Witch, the Mummifi ed Lady, Vampire Queen, Lifestealer, the Soul Collector, Opener of the Gates.
Aspects: Death, corruption, decay, darkness, evil, undead.
Symbol: A clenched, mummifi ed fi st.
Priesthood: Death Lords or Ladies (priests); Death Knights (paladins).
Herald: A skeleton in a black cloak. Holy Day: First and last day of Deorcmonan each
month. Duties: To destroy life, to aid Wild Card undead, to
expand the Withered Lands. Sins: (Minor) giving burial rites to any creature, refus-
ing to turn a corpse into an undead, refusing to aid or working against a Wild Card undead; (Major) willfully slaying a lesser undead; (Mortal) willfully slaying a Wild Card undead.
Signature Power: Zombie. Powers: Arcane resistance, armor, aura, banish,
beast friend, blast, bolt, boost/lower trait, champion of the faith, corpse senses, defl ection, dispel, enhance un-dead, ethereal/corporeal, fatigue, fear, fog cloud, glyph, gravespeak, greater zombie, invisibility, nightmare, obscure, prolonged blast, sacrifi ce, sanctuary, sluggish refl exes, slumber, strength of the undead, stun, summon herald, weaken undead.
Trappings: Spells must have a necromantic or dark-ness trapping whenever possible.
Hela is the former goddess of death. She judged souls before they entered the afterlife, and guarded the Gates of the Dead, stopping souls from escaping, and turning back those not ready for the afterlife. After her betrayal, the souls she unleashed began worshipping Hela as their god, and her transformation into the God of Undeath was complete. As befi ts her aspects, she is depicted as a skeletal fi gure wrapped in a funerary shroud.
Although undoubtedly an evil goddess, Hela is not popular with the other dark powers. The souls in the Abyss belonged to Niht, Vali, and the demon lords, and Hela’s act as much betrayed them as it did the good gods, for it robbed them of many followers.
Hela’s public shrines in civilized lands have been sup-planted by those of Scaetha. Shrines within the Withered Lands are dedicated to her new aspects, bedecked in the skulls of sacrifi cial victims, and stained with the blood of countless innocents. Temples to Hela may exist, but few sane folks have entered the Withered Lands in the last few decades, and even fewer have returned. Worshipping Hela grants no safe passage in the lands of the undead unless one has the power to defend oneself.
Hela’s priests are concerned with creating a realm of undeath on the mortal realm. Raising the dead is a core part of their daily routine. Paladins serve as guards and recruiters for the undead army (a term which refers both to murder and grave robbing) and combat Scaetha’s mortal worshippers. Both are expected to loyally serve any liche they encounter, for these vile undead are Hela’s most powerful mortal servants.
Festivals involve either ritual sacrifi ce (not always a sentient being) or the raising of the dead. Mournful wails, dirges, and dark litanies accompany these acts. Worshippers wear skull masks during these celebrations, mimicking the forms they hope to achieve once Hela cre-ates her realm of undeath.
RELIGION
Legends say that disciples of the Black Queen know the secrets of becoming dread liches and black knights, though thankfully such knowledge must be extremely rare, for these fi ends are among the rarest of the un-dead.
HOENIR
Titles: The All Knowing, the Font of Knowledge, Wise
One, Revealer of Secrets, Loregiver. Aspects: Knowledge, literacy, scribes, historians, re-
vealing secrets. Symbol: An open book. Priesthood: Gray Sages (priests); Seekers of Knowl-
edge (paladins) Herald: A studious sage with blank eyes. Holy Day: Healfdaeg. Duties: Preserve knowledge, fi nd lost knowledge,
spread knowledge and learning. Sins: (Minor) allowing knowledge to be destroyed or
concealed, allowing knowledge to be twisted, refusing to teach someone, not correcting an inaccuracy of impor-tance; (Major) willfully concealing important knowledge, refusing to teach an illiterate person to read and write; (Mortal) willfully destroying important knowledge.
Signature Power: Detect/conceal. Powers: Altered senses, arcane resistance, beast
friend, bless/panic (bless only), bolt, boost/lower trait (Smarts and Smarts-linked skills only), champion of the faith, confusion, dispel, farsight, glyph, gravespeak, insight, light, lock/unlock, mimic, mind rider, precog-nition, sanctuary, silence, speak language, summon demon (librarian and revealer only), summon herald, voice on the wind, wandering senses, warding.
Trappings: Clergy may use any trapping. Other: Followers of Hoenir cannot be Illiterate. Hoenir is revered for teaching mankind how to build
and sculpt, how to use fi re, and how to read and write. As well as scribes, skalds, antiquarians, and sages, he is also worshipped by explorers, diviners, soothsayers, accoun-tants, and tomb robbers (alongside his wayward brother, Nauthiz). Statues of him show an elderly, bearded man, holding a book under his left arm.
Temples are referred to as Libraries, and every temple has its sacred library, which serves as both a place of study and as the main area of worship. All manner of books, from poems to diaries donated by visitors, trea-ties on warfare to books on the darkest desires of man, are all on open display, for Hoenir teaches that all knowl-edge should be freely available. Shrines are uncommon, though any establishment where knowledge is required often has a statue of Hoenir or at least an engraving of his holy symbol.
The Gray Sages spend their days copying books, repairing old tomes, and haggling with merchants (and tomb robbers) to acquire new works of wisdom. Their gray robes refl ect their belief that knowledge is neutral— how people use knowledge determines good and evil. The Seekers, on the other hand, are dispatched into the
world to actively track down works of knowledge, espe-cially those in old tombs in danger of being lost to tomb robbers. Both types of clerics are renowned for their great wisdom and often serve as counselors to nobles.
Festivals are, to outsiders, extremely dull, taking the form of lectures and readings. Through this practice, the clerics seek to encourage the spread of knowledge among their own ranks and the laity.
HOTHAR
Titles: The Balance, the Sword of Justice, the Blind
God, Oath Sealer, the Impartial One. Aspects: Justice, law, order, conformance, truth. Symbol: Scales balanced on a sword tip. Priesthood: Scales of Justice (priests); Swords of
Truth (paladins). Herald: A blindfolded judge carrying a large sword. Holy Day: None. Services are held each day before
the local court sits. Duties: To uphold the law, protect the rights of all
races, ensure justice is served fairly. Sins: (Minor) lying, denying someone a fair hearing,
committing a crime for good reason, making an arbitrary judgment; (Major) allowing a miscarriage of justice to go unpunished, making false accusations, committing a crime without good reason; (Mortal) perjury, committing a deliberate miscarriage of justice.
Signature Power: Charismatic aura. Powers: Altered senses, arcane resistance, armor,
barrier, beast friend, bladebreaker, boost/lower trait, champion of the faith, defl ection, detect/conceal, dispel, entangle, environmental protection, fear, invisibil-ity, light, puppet, quickness, sanctuary, silence, smite, speak language, speed, stun, summon herald, voice on the wind.
Trappings: Clergy may use any trapping except a necromantic one.
Hothar is depicted with empty eye sockets. In his left hand he holds a sword and in his right a book of laws. Many outsiders question this arrangement. Hothar’s teachings hold that the law must come fi rst and retri-bution and punishment second. Thus, Hothar holds his sword in his weaker hand.
Hothar accepted being blinded by his fellow gods so he would not be swayed in his judgments by looks or bribes. Instead, Hothar would listen only to the words of those he judged and would see only the guilt or in-nocence within their soul.
Although he spends much of his time settling disputes between the gods, he also aids Scaetha in judging the souls of the departed. Unswayable by any trickery, Ho-thar can see the stains on a mortal’s soul with a cursory glance, and is quick to reveal his fi ndings.
Most court buildings, whether civil, noble, or ecclesi-astical, have a shrine to Hothar. Often this is little more than his holy symbol inscribed into the cover of a book of laws, on which all jurors and witnesses are required to swear an oath to speak only the truth while they are
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
being questioned. Only the most corrupt courts in the land let witnesses give evidence without fi rst swearing the oath.
Temples, where they exist, are typically the only court buildings in a settlement. In such places, the clerics are granted the authority to handle all criminal cases, though the ruling noble often reserves the right to intercede.
Priests most often serve communities as judges, en-suring that wealth or temporal power do not come in the way of a fair trial, or as legal advisors to ruling nobles. Naturally, most of the rich and powerful prefer trial by their peers. Citizens who can afford the fees can hire a priest as a lawyer, though their unwillingness to bend or twist the law means they are sometimes not as effec-tive as a member of the Anari Guild of Lawyers. Paladins act as an unoffi cial police force in their towns, usually liaising with the local militia but acting independently to avoid accusations of corruption or backhanded deals.
Festivals are usually recitations of the law accompanied by prayers and hymns. In many cases, the clergy reaffi rm their vows of obedience to their deity and are required
to recant any sins, accepting whatever punishment their superiors deem appropriate without question.
Oaths, which are popular among all races, are sworn in Hothar’s name, for he despises those who would break a sacred compact, sending his heralds to speak out against oath breakers when they are judged by Scaetha.
KENAZ
Titles: Firestarter, Lord of Volcanoes, Flame Cloak,
the Burning One, Soot-Face, Hearthwarmer. Aspects: Fire, hearths, volcanoes, fl ame. Symbol: A pile of red-hot coals. Priesthood: Hearthkeepers (priests); Ashen Blades
(paladins) Herald: A member of the hero’s race swathed in fi re,
and with blackened, blistered skin. Holy Day: Every other Sunnandaeg. Duties: Safeguard the Hearthlands, defeat creatures
of the Hellfrost. Sins: (Minor) unknowingly aiding a servant of the
Hellfrost, eating uncooked food (except obvious food-stuffs, like fruit), not fi ghting a Hellfrost beast stronger than you, damaging a hearth, forge, or other source of heat; (Major) not fi ghting a Hellfrost beast weaker than you, destroying a hearth, forge, or other source of heat; (Mortal) knowingly aiding a servant of the Hellfrost.
Signature Power: Defl ection. Powers: Altered senses, aura, bladebreaker, blast,
bolt, burst, champion of the faith, elemental form (fi re only), elemental manipulation (fi re/heat only), energy immunity (cold, coldfi re, heat, fi re, ice, and water only), ethereal/corporeal (no corporeal), environmental pro-tection (fi re/heat only), fatigue, glyph, leaping, light, heat mask, prolonged blast, sanctuary, smite, speed, sphere of might, stun, summon elemental (fi re, lava, and steam only), summon herald, warding.
Trappings: Clergy must use a heat or fi re trapping whenever applicable. They cannot take cold, coldfi re, ice, necromantic, or water trappings.
Kenaz is the elemental god of fi re, though his father, Sigel, has dominion over the sun. Like his father, Kenaz is a fi erce opponent of the Hellfrost inhabitants, especially followers of the upstart Thrym. Kenaz is also a close ally of Ertha, providing the heat her smiths need to work metal. He is depicted as a black-skinned, bearded man, with red or orange hair.
Kenaz’s temples always have a sacred fl ame at the cen-ter. Novices within the order are required to ensure this sacred fl ame is never extinguished. Any creature daring to snuff out the fl ame is marked for death by slow roast-ing over hot coals.
Regardless of the weather, Kenaz’s temples are always warm, kept this way by scores of roaring fi res. In some settlements, the priests allow the homeless to sleep in the temple vestibule at night, out of the biting winds that wrack the land.
There are very few shrines to Kenaz—most are found in smithies, craftsmen who commonly worship both Ke-
RELIGION
naz and Ertha. The majority of citizens, especially those in the Hellfrost, have a special hearthstone engraved with his holy symbol, however.
As with Sigel, Kenaz’s clerics are expected to devote their time to combating the Hellfrost’s vile inhabitants, and are also charged with fi nding out why the sun is dim-ming and access to the elemental realm of fi re is closing. Some clergy perform the latter duty via scholarly means, whereas others scour the Hellfrost for clues.
Festivals typically involve fi re of some sort. In most cases the fi re is merely the focus of worship—clergy dance around the fl ame and throw small sacrifi ces into the heart. Walking barefoot over hot coals and waving limbs (or even whole bodies) in and out of roaring fl ames are also part of many ceremonies.
Prayers to Kenaz are always written on paper and thrown into a fi re, their words drifting upward on the resultant smoke.
MAERA
Titles: Mistress of Magic, Threadspinner, the White
Eye, Nightwatcher, Concealer of Secrets. Aspects: Magic (in all forms), mystery, divination, oc-
cult matters. Symbol: A half moon (silver and black halves) embla-
zoned with the symbol for infi nity in the reverse colors of the background.
Priesthood: Order of the Waxing Sickle (priests); Order of the Waning Sickle (paladins).
Herald: A cowled fi gure, with robes decorated with symbols of all types of mage.
Holy Day: Every Monandaeg. Duties: Maintain the magical fi elds, protect relics. Sins: (Minor) destroying a temporary relic (using it
does not count as destroying), not welcoming the moon each night, not casting a spell at least once a day, aid-ing others in permanently weakening a mage’s ability to work magic; (Major) permanently weakening a mage’s ability to work magic, failure to follow up a lead regard-ing a permanent relic; (Mortal) destroying a permanent relic.
Signature Power: Dispel. Powers: Arcane resistance, banish, barrier, bolt,
defl ection, detect/conceal, elemental manipulation, energy immunity, ethereal/corporeal, fl y, glyph, light, negate arcana, obscure, precognition, sanctuary, stun, summon elemental, summon herald, teleport, ward-ing.
Trappings: Clergy may use any type of trapping. Maera is the goddess of magic, personifi ed by the
moon, whose pale light affects the fl ow of magic in the world. Most mages, regardless of their art, worship her, for they are all affected by her waxing and waning. Her image is that of a cowled woman, holding a small loom in her left hand and a sphere (representing the moon) in her right hand.
Shrines to Maera are rare outside of magician’s domi-ciles, though some settlements worship her lunar aspect.
Temples are depositories of magical knowledge, well warded by glyphs and protected by paladins against raids by thieves, Justicars, and Reliquae. At the center of every temple is an open chamber where rituals are conducted by moonlight. Many temples have taken to installing glass roofs, allowing the moonlight access, but thwarting would-be intruders (and the inclement weather). Such are the times in which men now live.
Her priests worship the raw magical energy of the world, not the individual strands of magic mages so adore. In return, she grants her disciples the ability to work any spell, though not as well as a specialist mage. Many of her clerics are alchemists, spending their days creating temporary magic items.
Paladins of the faith hire themselves out as body-guards to those with a distrust of magic or who have reason to fear magical assault. They also explore old ruins in search of lost magic, returning it to their temple. Naturally, this puts them at odds with both the Justiciary and the Reliquary, and violent confrontations are quite common.
Maera’s festivals take the form of mystery plays, seem-ingly gibberish recitations. All prayers and hymns used in festivals are secret, their meaning hidden from the eyes and ears of the laity. Some ceremonies involve divination, which can take one of many forms. Although the use of cards or rune stones are the most common, dreams, the weather, fl ight of birds, residue left in herbal brews, the ripples caused by drops of water, and so on are all used.
NAUTHIZ
Titles: Thief Lord, the Reaching Hand, Purveyor of
Wealth, the Supreme Collector, Tomb Raider, the Silent One, the Enricher, Lord Luck, the Hand of Fate, Old Snake Eyes.
Aspects: Thievery, chance, stealth, concealment. Symbol: An open doorway. Priesthood: Purveyors (priests); Tomb Raiders (pala-
dins). Herald: A gaudily dressed rake. Holy Day: Second Marketdaeg of each month. Indi-
vidual celebrations are held after a lucrative escapade as well.
Duties: The pursuit of wealth through larceny, to defeat any security system.
Sins: (Minor) being robbed, being caught committing a crime, failure to steal an object of at least 100 gs value once a month; (Major) being convicted of a crime you committed, running out of money, failing to steal an item worth at least 500 gs once per season; (Mortal) betraying the trust of another member of the faith, failing to steal an item worth at least 1000 gs once per year.
Signature Power: Boost/lower trait (Agility, Climb-ing, Lockpicking, Notice, and Stealth only).
Powers: Altered senses, arcane resistance, bolt, bur-row, champion of the faith, confusion, decipher, detect/ conceal, dispel, ethereal/corporeal (no corporeal), for-tune’s favored, gravespeak, growth/shrink, invisibility,
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
light, lock/unlock, luck/jinx, obscure, negate arcana, sanctuary, silence, speak language, summon herald, wall walker, wandering senses.
Trappings: Clergy may use any trapping except a nec-romantic one. Those with a larcenous bent often favor darkness.
Special: Nauthiz is a greedy god. Every month, clergy must sacrifi ce a minimum of 50 gs worth of coins or goods to their god or commit a minor sin. Nauthiz is also a gambler and offers followers a single, double, or quits game of chance. The hero makes a Gambling roll (he can try to cheat— Nauthiz expects this) against a Gambling skill of d12+2. If the cleric loses, he owes the god 100 gs. Should he win, he owes nothing that month.
Nauthiz is the patron of thieves, tomb robbers, gam-blers, and happy-go-lucky souls. Hoenir and Var are his brothers. When statues to him are created, which is not often, they show a cowled fi gure with a handful of coins in his left hand and a pair of dice in the other.
The priesthood of Nauthiz doesn’t broadcast its exis-tence. Most cities have outlawed the cult, imposing harsh punishments on clergy caught in the act of thievery. As such, temples tend to be rather small, and are usually lo-cated in sewer systems or rundown parts of town where the town guard rarely patrols. Many change locations on a regular basis to prevent captured thieves from reveal-ing its whereabouts.
Priests tend to act as guildmasters or operate in settle-ments, though some run gambling houses. Paladins are expected to rob tombs, often protected with magic and mundane traps. Some paladins offer their services as security advisors, telling merchants and nobles how best to protect their assets. Nauthiz doesn’t mind this, so long as his clergy are well paid for their knowledge. Although driven by greed, the clergy also seek out supposedly theft proof tombs as a reminder that nothing remains inviolate forever.
There are no formal ceremonies to Nauthiz. When clerics wish to praise their god, they go out and steal something of value or take part in games of chance (typi-cally cheating as often as they can get away with).
NEORTHE
Titles: The Everfull Jug, the Turbulent One, the Tor-
rent, Lord of the Seas. Aspects: Lakes, rivers, sea, sailors, water. Symbol: A jug pouring out water. Priesthood: Navigators (priests); Marines (paladins) Herald: A mermaid (at sea) or a rough-looking sailor
with waterlogged clothes (on land). Holy Day: Every Waescdaeg. Any day a new ship is
blessed is also a local holy day. Duties: Protect and aid sailors and sea creatures,
keep watercourses clean and fl owing. Sins: (Minor) using a bridge when you can wade
or swim safely, allowing a water creature to be harmed except for food, not drinking your share of water each day; (Major) killing a water creature except for food,
not undertaking a sea voyage of at least a week duration once a year; (Mortal) polluting a water source, burying someone in the earth.
Signature Power: Environmental protection (water only).
Powers: Barrier, beast friend (sea creatures only), bolt, boost/lower trait (Boating and Swimming only), champion of the faith, elemental form (water only), elemental manipulation (water only), energy immunity (coldfi re, fi re, heat, ice, and water only), ethereal/corpo-real (no corporeal), fatigue, fog cloud, glyph, healing, mend, sanctuary, shape change (sea creatures only), stun, succor, summon beast (aquatic beasts only), sum-mon herald, summon elemental (water, mud, and steam only), wall of might, water walk.
Trappings: Clergy must use water trappings whenever appropriate. They cannot take fi re or heat trappings.
Neorthe commands all the waters of the world, be they rivers, oases, or oceans. Like the waters, the deity can be calm and benevolent one moment, and destructive and malevolent the next. His image is of a bearded man with seaweed for hair. When shown in full form, rather than just a torso, he has a fi sh’s tail instead of legs.
Neorthe is one of the four elemental gods. Only mari-ners and fi sherman worship him directly, though farm-ers pay him annual homage so he will give his brother Thunor enough water to sprinkle on their crops, but not so much it drowns them.
Shrines to Neorthe can be found on all ships, and many sailors carry small images of the god to protect them should they fall into the sea. Some springs, espe-cially hot springs, have shrines near by, and roads follow-ing the course of major rivers may also have small shrines along them. Most bridges are engraved with his symbol to ensure the god doesn’t take offense at their presence. Traditionally, any new ship, whether it is a rowboat or a vast warship, is blessed by a Navigator to ensure good luck and to appease Neorthe’s wrathful nature.
Every port of note has a temple to him, usually lo-cated by the docks. As well as being a place of worship, temples serve as soup kitchens for fi shermen and sailors down on their luck, and marketplaces where fi sherman, sailmakers, and netmakers can sell their wares. Captains seeking mercenaries to work as marines or sailors need-ing a ship use the temples as recruiting grounds.
Priests serve as ship captains or navigators, though a few earn their keep as cartographers. Paladins, as befi ts their name, commonly work as waterborne-mercenaries, rowing and fi ghting when necessary. Both are respon-sible for protecting watercourses. Sometimes this means killing despoilers, such as orcs, or clearing up the fell residues left by mining operations. During winter they hack away at ice to keep smaller rivers fl owing. Some travel far and wide as part of their work, others restrict themselves to a single body or stretch of water.
Ceremonies are rarely conducted on land, that being an affront to Neorthe. Sacrifi ces take the form of coins or worked objects, which are thrown into rivers, lakes, or the sea for Neorthe to collect. Animal sacrifi ces are
RELIGION
typically land animals or birds—the killing of a marine creature is considered a sin, except when it is done to provide food.
NIHT
Titles: The Concealer, Nightlady, Mistress of Darkness,
Backstabber, the Creeping Shadow, the Black Blade, the Unseen One.
Aspects: Assassins, darkness, concealment, keeping of secrets, secret murder.
Symbol: A swirl of black on a gray background. Priesthood: Shadowlords (priests); Black Blades
(paladins). Herald: A humanoid form of inky darkness. Holy Day: Every day of Deorcmonan. During Fog-
monan, these are high holy days. Heah Wyntr Daeg is a major holy day.
Duties: Commit murder, destroy knowledge, spread ignorance, conceal objects from view.
Sins: (Minor) spreading knowledge, not destroying at least one book a month, writing a book or giving a lecture; (Major) betraying a confi dence, allowing an object or secret you concealed to be revealed; (Mortal) revealing a deep secret given to you in trust, failure to complete a contracted killing.
Signature Power: Obscure. Powers: Altered senses, banish, bless/panic (panic
only), bolt, boos/.lower trait (Agility, Climbing, Fighting, Shooting, Stealth, and Throwing only), burrow, cham-pion of the faith, confusion, defl ection, conceal (con-ceal only), energy immunity, (darkness and light only), entangle, ethereal/corporeal, farsight, fear, fog cloud, heat mask, invisibility, nightmare, quickness, sacrifi ce, sanctuary, sentry, shrink (no growth), silence, smite, summon elemental (shadow only), summon herald, teleport, wall walker, wandering senses.
Trappings: Niht’s clergy must use a darkness trap-ping where appropriate. They may never use a light or fi re trapping.
Lady of darkness and all that lurks within the shad-ows, Niht is a goddess of evil intention. Clergy of Hoenir consider her especially vile, as she directly opposes their deity. Lorekeepers, even those who do not follow Hoenir, also consider Niht’s followers sworn enemies. Statues depict a female form, but one devoid of any features. Regardless of the material used in their construction, statues are always stained black.
Temples to Niht are constructed underground or in blackened rooms. Bringing light into a temple is consid-ered an act of desecration, and no expense is spared in hunting and punishing down the perpetrators. Shrines are uncommon, and when they do exist, they are typi-cally found in caves in the wilderness, where local wor-shippers can gather in secret, away from the prying eyes of curious neighbors.
Niht’s paladins are assassins for hire. Although nu-merous assassins’ guilds exist, those who can afford the fee always elect to use the church of Niht. Priests are
usually more concerned with the destruction of knowl-edge and keeping secrets. Rather perversely, many act as confessors to powerful individuals who trust their dark-est secrets will die with the priest, and yet cleanse their soul of any taint through confession. Clergy have been known to aid the Reliquary at times, for they seek only to remove knowledge from the public eye, not gather it for their own use.
Most festivals and ceremonies involve destroying knowledge. Book burning is the most common form of destruction, an act which also serves as a sacrifi ce. Some scholars believe Niht is secretly gathering all the knowl-edge in the universe for herself, though to what purpose none dare speculate. On special occasions, priests or paladins who have repeatedly sinned have their tongues cut out and hands removed as punishment, while heavily cloaked clergy sing dark and somber hymns to cover the screams.
THE NORNS
Titles: Fateweavers, the Three Sisters, the Inescap-
able Ones. Aspects: Fate, destiny, past, present, future. Symbol: A weaving loom. Priesthood: Fatespeakers (priests); Hand of Destiny
(paladins). Herald: A cloaked fi gure holding a sandglass in one
hand and a length of tapestry that fades into nothing-ness.
Holy Day: None. Priests are expected to give thanks when a particularly fateful event occurs.
Duties: To ensure that fate runs its true course, to end overdue lives, to protect those with destiny.
Sins: (Minor) revealing too much of the past or pres-ent; (Major) allowing a creature to live past its allotted time, allowing an unborn creature to exist; (Mortal) revealing too much of the future.
Signature Power: Precognition. Powers: Analyze foe, banish, bless/panic, bolt, boost/
lower trait, champion of the faith, confusion, defl ection, dispel, entangle, fatigue, fortune’s favored, healing, insight, invisibility, luck/jinx, mimic, quickness, speed, succor, summon herald, teleport, warding (constructs, demons, and undead only).
Trappings: Trappings are usually related to time, but powers can have any trapping.
Urd, Verdandi, and Skuld are collectively known as the Norns, the three sisters who control past, present, and future, respectively. According to the teachings of the church, the life story of every natural being is woven, at the time of their birth, into the great tapestry of life and is an inescapable destiny. Even the gods have pre-defi ned life spans. The Norns weave the threads of fate, intertwining the destinies of every living being. Urd is shown as a child or young maiden, Verdandi as a middle-aged woman, and Skuld as a haggard crone.
There are no temples to the Norns, and even shrines are rare. The Three Sisters are, by nature of their aspects,
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
part of everything, and all acts honor them because they are part of every individual’s destiny.
Priests often work as soothsayers. Though they have no direct powers to view the entire skein of a man’s life, the Norns allow them brief, veiled glimpses, enough to provide a clue to the path a man must walk, but not enough to reveal what fate awaits him. Some things man must discover for himself. Even the other gods are bound by this restriction, despite several attempts by the gods (not all of them evil) in prehistory to gain the knowledge of foresight.
Paladins, on the other hand, are charged with hunting down and eradicating creatures which were not born, and therefore have no strand in the tapestry, such as un-dead (whose physical remains have already reached the end of their strand of life), constructs (which are artifi cial life forms), and demons (who are created from tainted souls). They especially hate revealer demons.
Clergy never perform ceremonies or hold festivals. The three sisters neither want nor demand praise from mortals.
RIGR
Titles: Watchman of the Gods, Guardian of Heaven,
He Who Stares into Darkness, the Vigilant, the One-Eyed God.
Aspects: Vigilance, protection of settlements, warn-ings.
Symbol: A pair of eyes, one open and one shut. Priesthood: Eyes of the Vigilant (priests); Watchmen
(paladins). Herald: A member of the summoner’s race with eight
eyes, one pair on each side of its head. Holy Day: None. Clerics are expected to be eternally
vigilant, not distracted by lengthy ceremonies. Any day an attack is averted is usually celebrated in some way, however.
Duties: To watch over communities, to avoid con-frontation through scouting.
Sins: (Minor) failing to spot a trap, refusing to do sentry duty when you are not tired, allowing other sen-tries on your watch to fall asleep, letting someone get the
RELIGION
Drop on you; (Major) allowing someone or something to slip past you on sentry duty, being caught in an ambush; (Mortal) falling sleep on sentry duty.
Signature Power: Detect/conceal (detect only). Powers: Altered senses, analyze foe, boost/lower
trait (Vigor, Notice, Stealth, and Tracking only), cham-pion of the faith, environmental protection, farsight, fog cloud (dispel version only), heat mask, invisibility, light, sanctuary, sentry, silence, speak language, speed, storm (dispel version only), summon herald, teleport, wandering senses, voice on the wind.
Trappings: Any, except darkness or necromantic. Light is the most common.
Although Rigr is sometimes called the One-Eyed God, he actually has two eyes when depicted in images. This name comes from the belief that Rigr, and indeed many of his most devout clergy, can sleep with one eye open, ever alert of danger.
Shrines are usually found in watchtowers and watch barracks, where sentries and watch can pray for vigilance. Temples can be found in larger settlements, where they serve as watch barracks and redoubts. Temples always have a tall watchtower, from which hangs a large bell, to be sounded only in times of emergency. In times of war, the clergy of Rigr and Tiw work closely together, the former commanding offensive actions and the latter defensive ones.
Rigr’s clergy are responsible for safeguarding their communities. In towns, they often work alongside the local watch, training new recruits and overseeing defenses. In rural communities, they may actually be the local watch. While priests tend to stay within settle-ments, paladins go into the world as scouts and trackers, using their powers to hunt down dangerous monsters marauding through the local countryside. Most often they are concerned with supernatural beasts or other evils, such as undead or orcs, but sometimes they work with paladins of Ullr to exterminate wolves and other natural menaces.
Rigr’s insistence on eternal vigilance means he does not require his clergy to perform ceremonies or hold fes-tivals. Doing one’s job is suffi cient praise, though prayers may be spoken and hymns sung while on watch.
SCAETHA
Titles: Judger of Souls, Holder of the Two Keys, Gate-
keeper, Soulkeeper, Shieldmaiden of the Gods. Aspects: Death, fi nal judgment, hate undead Symbol: A skull with an axe embedded in the top. Priesthood: Eulogists (priests); Divine Slayers (pala-
dins). Herald: A member of the hero’s race, shining with
divine fury. Holy Day: Every Sunnandaeg. During Werremonan
these are high holy days. Duties: Destroy undead and demons. Sins: (Minor) refusing to destroy an Extra undead
or demon, engaging in conversation with an undead
or demon (except to Intimidate or Taunt it), allowing a corpse to be buried without blessing it, desecrating a tomb or other burial place; (Major) refusing to destroy a Wild Card undead or demon, not spending a week in the Withered Lands once a year; (Mortal) knowingly aiding an undead, demon, or cleric of Hela.
Signature Power: Weaken undead. Powers: Arcane resistance, armor, banish, blade-
breaker, bless/panic (bless only), bodyguard, bolt, boost/lower trait, champion of the faith, defl ection, dis-pel, ethereal/corporeal (no ethereal), glyph, gravespeak, healing, heat mask, immunity (necromantic only), invisibility, light, prolonged blast, quickness, sanctu-ary, smite, sphere of might, summon herald, warding, warrior’s gift, weapon immunity.
Trappings: Clergy may use any trapping except dark-ness or necromantic.
Scaetha, a daughter of Tiw, once served as a lesser war deity. Her responsibilities included blessing female fi ght-ers before battle and harvesting the souls of the fallen faithful for deliverance to her father’s mead hall.
When Hela unlocked the gate to the Abyss, Scaetha joined Sigel in stemming the tide of souls. She drove Hela away from the gates and closed them, despite suf-fering many wounds, thus preventing any more souls from escaping.
In return for her service, Sigel promoted Scaetha to the role of goddess of death and judger of souls, replac-ing Hela in this role. Since Sigel’s disappearance, she has also become the champion of those who follow the light, although she grants no special favors with regard this aspect of the universe.
Scaetha is depicted as a stern-faced woman clad in armor. Saxa tend to show her in chain mail, elves in leather, while Anari and dwarf prefer plate mail. She car-ries a sword in her right hand and shield in her left.
Shrines in her honor can be found in any settlement’s graveyard, and normally take the form of a stone raven with spread wings. Her temples are dark and gloomy plac-es, where any sound seems muffl ed. Dotted throughout the temple are numerous crypts, each containing clerics and paladins who fell in battle against undead. Though their mortal remains lie silent, their souls continue the battle in the afterlife. The war against evil is eternal for followers of this faith.
Scaetha’s clergy serve two purposes. First, they are responsible for blessing corpses, ensuring they reach Scaetha without being intercepted. Second, they wage a perpetual war against the undead. It is for the latter they are most renowned. Priests and paladins perform much the same roles, though paladins tend to be more militant in their outlook. Both are typically stern and humorless, for their work brings them in contact with many horrors.
Ceremonies and festivals revolve around death. Dirges, poems about fallen heroes, and eulogies to lost comrades make up much of the proceedings. Prayers and hymns are centered around blessing departed souls, in the hope Scaetha fi nds them innocent of any sin.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
SIGEL
Titles: The All-Seeing Eye, the Burning Eye, Father of
Light, Scourge of Darkness, Foe Scorcher, the Pure One. Aspects: Sun, light, purity, good. Symbol: A golden stylized sun disc. Priesthood: Sun Priests (priests); Sun Knights (pala-
dins). Herald: A half-man, half-sun dragon. Holy Day: Every Sunnandaeg. Heah Sumor Daeg is a
high holy day. Duties: To promote the cause of good, to bring light
into the world, to oppose the forces of darkness. Sins: (Minor) not welcoming the sun each morning,
remaining underground for more than a day, gambling or drinking to excess, performing a minor evil act; (Major) permanently blinding a foe, refusing to fi ght the forces of darkness, not standing up against immoral behavior, committing a major evil act; (Mortal) willfully aiding the forces of darkness.
Signature Power: Light. Powers: Altered senses, aura, banish, bless/panic
(bless only), bolt, burst, champion of the faith, defl ec-tion, elemental manipulation (fi re only), energy immu-nity (cold, coldfi re, heat, fi re, ice, or water only), envi-ronmental protection (fi re/heat only), farsight, fatigue, invisibility, precognition, prolonged blast, sanctuary, speed, sphere of might, stun, summon elemental (fi re only), summon herald, teleport, warding, weaken un-dead.
Trappings: Followers must have a light, heat, or fi re trapping whenever possible. They cannot take cold, coldfi re, darkness, ice, or necromantic trappings.
After Hela’s rebellious act, Sigel, god of light, led the fi ght against the darkness she had unleashed into the world. However, it appears he has vanished, and Scaetha now leads the fi ght in his absence. Before the Blizzard War, Sigel’s Hearth (the common name for the sun) shone brilliantly, a glowing orb that warmed the Hearthlands. Since that day, the sun has grown steadily weaker, and its radiance has dimmed, as if something had placed a veil over the burning eye. Sigel’s clerics have noticed a reduction in their power, especially in the frozen wastes.
Sigel is represented as a man with a circle, represent-ing the eternal sun, around his head. He holds a sword in his right hand. A fl ame, the light of purity, rises from his left palm.
Shrines to Sigel exist in most Hearthland settlements, and usually take the form of a large sundial. In some communities, Maera and Sigel are worshipped jointly, with a sun- and moondial marking the shrine. Temples are found only in large towns, and are always spacious and brilliantly lit. They are often lavishly decorated with gold, the god’s chosen metal, and paladins are housed in large numbers to deter thieves.
With the clergy of Scaetha engaged in war against the undead threat, Sigel’s priests and paladins now focus on preventing the expansion of the Hellfrost. Many of his
priests work closely with the Hearth Knights, either as healers and spiritual guides, or as mercenaries.
Festivals and ceremonies take place at dawn, midday, and dusk. Prayers and hymns are the most common form of worship. Some clergy dedicate Hellfrost foes they are about to slay to their god, in the hope their deaths strengthen the waning deity.
THRYM
Titles: Hrimkonungr (an old Saxa term meaning “ Ice
King”), Blizzard Roar, the White King, the Eternal Winter, Frost Lord.
Aspects: Cold, ice, winter, blizzards, icy realms. Symbol: Hellfrost dragonhead. Priesthood: Breath of Winter (priests); Talons of
Winter (paladins). Herald: A half-frost giant, half-Hellfrost dragon. Holy Day: Any day the temperature is below freezing.
The fi rst day of Fogmonan and last day of Frostmonan are high holy days.
Duties: To expand the Hellfrost, to destroy servants of fi re and heat.
Sins: (Minor) lighting a fi re, deliberately warming oneself by a fi re, eating cooked food more than once a week; (Major) slaying any creature with Resistance or Immunity to cold except in self-defense, living in the Hearthlands for more than half a year without permis-sion of a superior; (Mortal) slaying a Hellfrost dragon, working against the Fimbulvintr.
Signature Power: Entangle. Powers: Armor, aura, barrier, beast friend (creatures
with Resistance or Immunity to cold only), bladebreaker, bolt, bridge, burrow, burst, champion of the faith, de-fl ection, detect/conceal, dispel, elemental form (coldfi re, ice, or slush only), elemental manipulation (not fi re), energy immunity (cold, coldfi re, heat, fi re, or ice only), environmental protection (cold only), fatigue, fear, fl y, glyph, heat mask, light, obscure, prolonged blast, sanc-tuary, sluggish refl exes, smite, sphere of might, storm, stun, summon demon (ice only), summon elemental (coldfi re, ice, or slush only), summon herald, voice on the wind, wilderness step (ice or snow only).
Trappings: Spellcasters must take a cold, coldfi re, or ice trapping where appropriate. They may never use a fi re or heat trapping.
To most folk, the Hellfrost is a natural realm of ice and snow. To the followers of Thrym, the Hellfrost is a living embodiment of their god’s awesome power, and his desire to crush the world beneath a vast sheet of ice. Thrym seeks nothing more than to bring about the Fim-bulvintr—an age of endless blizzards, a total ice age for the world of mortals.
Although most often worshipped by evil races such as snow orcs and frost giants, he actually cares little for good or evil, as these are simply moral choices assigned to a culture by its own members. Most hrimwisards pay him lip service, if only because their spells are more po-tent in his frigid realm.
GLORY
to 42. The Hearth Knights open relations again now the hero’s reputation is not as sullied—Barak does not get to pick a new benefi t.
DEATH & HONOR (AUTOMATIC)
When a character dies, his replacement normally be-gins with half his Experience Points. However, high or low Glory at the time of the character’s death can alter this amount.
When a character dies with below 99 Glory, the char-acter has 50% Experience as standard. Between 100 and 199 Glory, the replacement has 75% Experience, and at 200 and over he retains the full Experience Points 9of his predecessor.
COMBAT PROWESS (2)
Requirements: 40+ Glory While most stories about heroes start of close to
the truth, they quickly spiral out of control, attributing heroes with abilities far in excess of what they actually possessed.
The character may take a Combat Edge immediately. He must meet all the requirements as normal.
CONNECTION (4)
Requirements: 20+ Glory At some point a hero is likely to gain Glory by aiding
certain organizations, whether directly or indirectly. When a hero gains a Connection, he must pick a
specifi c group, as per the Edge of the same name. The hero does not belong to the organization—he simply has friends among their number willing to assist him (though he may, at the GM’s discretion, be offered membership as well).
The Connection should be appropriate to the character’s background and his deeds. For instance, a hero who slays many Hellfrost beasts likely attracts the attention of the Hearth Knights, whereas one who stops an outbreak of disease caused by a plague demon might fi nd the church of Eira or Sisters of Mercy are favorable toward him.
Note that the hero still needs Persuasion and Street-wise for this benefi t to be of any use. Just because he’s renowned, it doesn’t mean the Connection will drop everything and come to his aid with exactly what he wants.
FAVORED (2)
Requirements: 60+ Glory The adage that there are old heroes and bold heroes,
but no old, bold heroes doesn’t apply to this character. Whether because he believes in his own legend and
refuses to get up when the going gets tough, or whether the gods are smiling on him, the hero can do things other heroes can’t.
He gains a free benny. This adds to his regular total, thus increasing the number he starts each session with.
FOLLOWERS (10)
Requirements: 40+ Glory Famous heroes attract entourages and hangers-on. The
hero gains the Followers Edge regardless of his character Rank. The GM and player should work together to deter-mine the nature of the Followers, based on the character’s profession and deeds (see p. 100 for details).
Followers are not automatically replaced when they die. Additional Followers may be gained at Legendary as normal through taking the Followers Edge with advances or by earning more Glory and taking this benefi t.
Followers don’t automatically leave if a character’s Glory drops below the level he gained this benefi t, but they begin to grumble, refuse orders, and eventually mutiny. In game terms, the character’s Leadership Edges no longer work on them. When his Glory rises above the threshold again, his Followers stop grumbling.
As noted previously in this chapter, having Extras ac-company you on every mission means you have to slay more foes to earn Glory.
HEROIC AURA (4)
Requirements: 40+ Glory True heroes have destinies beyond those of lesser
men. As a hero becomes more famous, so his fate be-comes more important. Lesser foes no longer present the danger they once did, and only the mightiest enemies give the hero pause.
When not wearing armor (he may use a shield), he gains +1 Toughness each time he takes this benefi t. While wearing armor, no benefi t is gained. Encumbrance plays no part in this benefi t—the modifi er is gained even if the hero is heavily weighed down with other gear.
In game terms, taking this benefi t once grants the protection equivalent of leather armor, but it cannot be reduced by AP weapons, protects against area effect at-tacks, and has zero encumbrance. With a second benefi t, the hero as well protected as wearing chain mail, three times plate, a fourth time gives him better protection than any mundane armor.
HEROIC STATUS (4)
Requirements: 20+ Glory This bonus represents how well known the hero is
across Rassilon. With heroes few and far between in the modern era, those who stand out from the crowd are widely recognized for their notable deeds.
Common folk recognize the hero for his brave deeds and are likely to help him in his endeavors, if only for the bragging rights.
He gains a +1 bonus to initial rolls on the Reaction Table when dealing with civilized races with whom he has a generally positive reputation, and to Persuasion
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
fl eeing a fi ght against an inferior opponent, being beaten in combat without good cause; (Mortal) surrendering without a fi ght.
Signature Power: Armor (Shields) or smite (Swords). The other may be learned as normal.
Powers: Aim, armor, battle song, bladebreaker, blast, bolt, boost/lower trait (Spirit, Strength, Vigor, Fighting, Guts, Riding, Shooting, and Throwing), burst, champion of the faith, defl ection, energy immunity, fatigue, gift of battle, knockdown, prolonged blast, quickness, sluggish refl exes, sanctuary, smite, speed, stun, summon herald, warrior’s gift, weapon immunity.
Trappings: Clergy may use any trapping except a necromantic one.
Tiw is the patron of warfare. He shows no favoritism toward any race or cause, demanding only warfare and bloodshed in his name. In this regard he is neither a truly good nor evil deity, though because Dargar specializes in butchery, Tiw is generally considered to be on the side of the civilized races.
No one representation of Tiw is shared among his worshippers. Depending on the culture or race of the local cleric and his preference of weapons, Tiw is seen clad in a variety of armor and carrying different weapons. What all images share is a fi erce, resolute expression.
Soldiers, militia, marines, and mercenaries, as well as many goblin and orc tribes, are his favored followers, though most people facing the threat of combat know basic prayers to keep the god happy. Because he cares only about battle (not the tactics or strategy behind them), few Knights Hrafn worship Tiw, though they do pay him lip service just in case they need to engage in combat.
Any settlement with a militia has a shrine to Tiw. Usu-ally this is nothing more than a special weapon blessed by a Shield. Larger towns may have a full temple. Usu-ally fortifi ed (treat as a fortifi ed manor), they serve as barracks for squads of paladins, armories for the local militia, and recruiting centers for mercenaries. In Vest-mark, temples to Tiw are used as command posts in the war against the orcs.
The worship hall of a temple is akin to an armory, with weapons and armor of all types, and ages, adorning the walls. These are never used in combat, however, but are memento mori for fallen clergy, placed in honored positions in close view of the altar.
Shields and Swords serve the order in different ways. Whereas Swords are the faith’s muscle and often hire themselves out as mercenaries, Shields take work as bodyguards, enriching the coffers by working for nobles, mages, or priests in need of protection.
Ceremonies and festivals center around combat and victory. In older times, conquered foes were sacrifi ced, though these days this is reserved for non-civilized races. Many dances to Tiw are based on combat moves, form-ing a carefully choreographed battle in which Tiw wins out over his many foes. Battle prayers and hymns are popular, and music is made by clashing weapons on shields or armor.
ULLR
Titles: The Guiding Hand, the Huntsman, Master of
the Wyld Hunt, Truefl ight, the Horned God, Lord of the Rut.
Aspects: Hunting, archery, trackers, prey animals. Symbol: A stag’s head with arrow points at the tips
of the antlers. Priesthood: Huntsmen (priests); Hounds of Ullr
(paladins). Herald: A muscular, stag-headed humanoid armed
with a huge bow. Holy Day: Any day before a hunt. The fi rst and last
days of Huntianmonan are high holy days. Duties: Provide food for their communities, ensure
hunters hunt only in season, to protect the wild. Sins: (Minor) hunting out of season, allowing a
wounded mundane animal to suffer, not thanking the spirit of a hunted mundane animal for its sacrifi ce; (Ma-jor) not using every usable scrap for a mundane animal’s carcass, allowing a mundane animal to be hunted purely for sport; (Mortal) killing any mundane animal purely for sport.
Signature Power: Aim. Powers: Altered senses, beast friend, boost/lower
trait (Agility, Notice, Shooting, Survival, and Tracking only), champion of the faith, defl ection, entangle, envi-ronmental protection, feast, heat mask, leaping, refuge, sanctuary, sentry, shape change, silence, speed, summon beast, summon herald, voice on the wind, wandering senses, wilderness step.
Trappings: Trappings usually relate to arrows or hunted animals. They cannot use necromantic trap-pings.
Ullr is the son of Eostre. He is patron of hunters and archers, and protector of mundane wild animals. He is depicted as a horned, bearded man, carrying a bow in one hand and a horn in the other.
Temples to Ullr are found only in remote places. They are open-air affairs comprising nothing more than an altar stone topped with a stag’s skull. Each year, before and after hunting season, the clergy sacrifi ce a stag to Ullr. The fl esh of the sacrifi ce is eaten by the hunters for luck, and the skin is used to make clothing.
His clergy work as hunters within their community and are thus usually found living outside towns. Both priests and paladins work as hunters, but his paladins also function as game wardens, ensuring animals are not hunted to excess or out of season, thus ensuring there will be enough game in the coming years. They also work closely with followers of Rigr in hunting down ma-rauding beasts, as well as exterminating orcs and goblins ravaging the wilds.
Ceremonies revolve around the hunt. Worshippers feast on the fl esh of hunted prey, always offering the best meats to their god. Prayers are said for the soul of the animal, in the hope it is reborn to provide another meal in the future. The blowing of horns always accompanies any form of ceremony.
RELIGION
THE UNKNOWABLE ONE
Titles: The Trickster, the Teacher of Hidden Ways. Aspects: Tricks, taunts, insults, bards, storytellers. Symbol: A two-headed coin. Priesthood: Jokers (priests); Mirthful Blades (pala-
dins). Herald: Changes form each and every time, ranging
from a beggar to a king. Holy Day: No set day. Clergy are expected to cel-
ebrate one day a month. Duties: Teach through practical applications of tricks
and taunts, remind all men of humility. Sins: (Minor) Intimidating someone, telling the
whole truth, tricking or taunting someone purely for malicious reasons, being tricked or taunted by someone with a lower trait die, teaching someone something ex-cept through a trick or taunt; (Major) Not trying to trick or taunt a foe at least once during a fi ght; (Mortal) taking insult at a trick or taunt made against you.
Signature Power: Shape change. Powers: Bladebreaker, bless/panic, boost/lower
trait, burrow, champion of the faith, charismatic aura, confusion, defl ection, detect/conceal, dispel, elemental manipulation, entangle, ethereal/corporeal, farsight, fear, fortune’s favored, invisibility, knockdown, light, luck/jinx, mimic, mind rider, obscure, puppet, quick-ness, sanctuary, silence, sluggish refl exes, summon demon (changeling only), summon herald, telekinesis, teleport, wandering senses, weapon immunity.
Trappings: Clergy may use any trapping except a nec-romantic one, and may freely swap them each casting.
Names hold great power, and for this reason, the Unknowable One refuses to reveal his, even to his most trusted followers. Likewise, he is never depicted in physi-cal form. Bards and skalds that use satire, jesters, clowns, conmen, and some soothsayers pay homage to the Trick-ster in their own way and for their own reasons.
Despite their reputation for having barbed tongues and a capricious nature, the clergy are actually teach-ers. Whereas Hoenir’s clerics use books, clerics of the Trickster teach through mistakes and tricks. A cleric who knows there is a concealed pit in front of him and who taunts a foe into charging into it might caution the victim to look before he leapt next time.
The key difference between priests and paladins is paladins teach foes through defeating them in combat. They may use taunts to unsettle them or tricks to un-balance them before placing a sword at their throat and declaring the opponent beaten. Opponents who refuse to accept defeat are dealt with accordingly.
There are no temples to the faith and very few shrines. The Trickster expects his clerics to live among the com-munity and encourage worship through telling jokes and pulling pranks.
The nature of ceremonies and festivals varies im-mensely, for the Unknowable One dislikes repetition. Dances, tall stories, and japes form the core of worship, as do humorous plays.
VALI
Titles: Plaguelord, Vermin King, King Rat, the Corrup-
tor, He Who Knows Men’s Evil, the Gaunt One, Backstab-ber, the Obese Lord.
Aspects: Corruption, vermin, disease, famine, vice, overindulgence, treachery, vengeance.
Symbol: A bloated rat covered in pustules. Priesthood: Plaguebearers or Corruptors (priests);
Verminlords or Unseen Hand (paladins). Herald: A morbidly obese half-man, half-rat creature,
covered in oozing sores. Holy Day: Each Raestdaeg. Duties: Spread sickness of the body and soul, to cor-
rupt good men, to indulge in all manner of depravity, to nurture treachery.
Sins: (Minor) killing a rat or other vermin, not com-mitting treachery when the chance occurs, leaving food or drink offered you; (Major) curing disease, not corrupt-
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
ing someone when the opportunity arises, not indulging in an act of common vice at least once a month; (Mortal) not indulging in a depraved act at least once a month.
Signature Power: Disease (Plaguebearers and Ver-minlords) or charismatic aura (Corruptors and Unseen Hands).
Powers: Armor, barrier, aura, beast friend (vermin only), boost/lower trait, burrow, champion of the faith, charismatic aura, detect/conceal, disease, entangle, fa-tigue, fear, nightmare, obscure, puppet, sacrifi ce, sanc-tuary, shape change (vermin only), smite, stun, summon demon (changeling, imp, plague, succubus/incubus only), summon herald.
Trappings: Vali’s trappings usually involve disease, vermin, or corruption in some way.
Hela may control the undead and Niht the darkness, but Vali is considered the chief of the evil gods. Aside from darkness and undead, Vali controls all aspects of evil. Vali is depicted as an obese man covered in lesions and boils, often with rats crawling over his feet.
He is considered the patron of all who sin, but many beggars follow him in the hope he will stop rats from eat-ing their food (or limbs) and rid them of disease. Many corrupt individuals, whether they are gambling addicts who would steal or murder for a few coins to wager, or nobles who enjoy an orgy to spice up their mundane lives, also pay him homage.
Farmers of good nature and virtue make offerings to him before planting to keep away blights that may lead to famine, and at harvest to keep his attention away from their granaries.
Vali’s temples are usually in the seediest part of town, if not actually under the streets, and are home to a multi-tude of rats and other vermin. Molds laden with disease-spores grow on the walls, and garbage lies in vast piles. A few temples exist in other parts of towns, often disguised as brothels, drug dens, and gambling houses. Again, like the seductive clergy, these are respectably decorated places, a glove of harmless fun concealing the gnarled claws of corruption.
Vali’s clergy are divided into two factions. The fi rst are devoted to Vali’s aspect of disease, overindulgence, and vermin. Hideously obese, diseased, and depraved be-yond any hope of redemption, they seek to spread pes-tilence and vermin infestations and cause famine. Priests usually work with diseases, whereas paladins prefer the accompaniment of rats and other vermin.
The second faction is dedicated to vice, treachery, ven-geance, and corruption. These are the more dangerous, for their sole duty is to corrupt good folk into follow-ing a road of depravity and sin. Priests tend to corrupt the innocent through words and promises, whereas the paladins work through action, removing foes or acquir-ing wealth for their target as “gifts,” all the while leading them down the path of damnation.
Vali’s festivals and ceremonies involve plentiful overindulgence and vice—the more the better. Orgies, drunken revels, drug taking, self-mutilation, and sado-masochism are all practiced (and frequently).
VAR
Titles: Master Merchant, Lord of Fair Trade, Sealer of
Contracts, Supreme Haggler, Glibtongue. Aspects: Merchants, trade, negotiations, contracts,
coinage, wealth. Symbol: A set of merchant’s scale, balanced with a
coin on end side and a sack on the other. Priesthood: Profi teers (priests); Thieftakers (pala-
dins). Herald: A smartly dressed merchant carrying a trade
ledger embossed with Var’s holy symbol. Holy Day: Every Marketdaeg. Duties: Promote trade, secure good deals. Sins: (Minor) not donating 25 gs a month to a temple
of Var, giving money to the poor, allowing stock to be stolen, selling goods at a loss, getting caught avoiding tax payment, selling stolen goods; (Major) not making a profi t each month, breaking a contract, cheating on weights or measures; (Mortal) caught smuggling, losing a regular trade deal.
Signature Power: Charismatic aura. Powers: Bladebreaker, bodyguard, bolt, boost/lower
trait (Smarts, Spirit, Intimidation, Persuasion, and Streetwise only), confusion, defl ection, detect/conceal, entangle, fear, lock/unlock (lock only), puppet, sanctu-ary, sentry, silence, slumber, speak language, speed, summon herald, teleport.
Trappings: Any except necromantic. Whereas Nauthiz is the god of plunder and theft, Var,
his twin brother, is the patron of legitimate mercantile activities.
Var is shown as a youthful man of smart appearance, who carries a set of merchant’s scales in his right hand while his left hand is open, as if expecting payment. His face is always depecited expressionless.
Shrines to Var can be found at the center of most mar-ketplaces, and in the houses of rich merchants who have benefi ted from Var’s favor. Warehouses are often marked with Var’s symbol, both to ensure the god’s blessing and as a warning to thieves. Temples exist only in large towns or ports and often serve as indoor markets or meeting houses where merchants can discuss trade deals in pri-vate rooms.
His priests are either merchants themselves or hire themselves out as advisors to mercantile families. Pala-dins are employed not to defend merchants against orcs or bandits (the Iron Guild has that monopoly, with Var’s blessing), but instead to protect against thieves. Both clergy are among the smartest dressed devotees of any god, and are usually well mannered and meticulously groomed. They are also extremely tightfi sted and ac-cused of having deep pockets and short arms.
Ceremonies usually revolve around the sacrifi ce of money. Although Var wants his clergy to do well fi nan-cially, he expects a cut of the profi ts for his blessings. Coins are the preferred sacrifi ce. These are melted down or bent to ensure they cannot be used again by unscru-pulous clergy or thieves.
This chapter looks at new trappings and spells avail-able to mages and clergy in Rassilon. Not every mage or priest has access to every trapping or spell, however.
Choosing an Arcane Background for a character is both a matter of which type of magic or which deity a player like, combined with the types of spells he envi-sions casting. Limitations are defi ned in the chapters on gods and magic.
Although in many ways Savage Worlds allows NPCs to break rules, allowing an NPC a spell not open to his particular Arcane Background should be avoided. The gods especially do not favor NPC priests anymore than they do Wild Card player characters.
Likewise, changing the powers lists to include new spells should be done as a last resort. All the Arcane Back-grounds have the spells they need, not the spells a player would necessarily want. Every Arcane Background has gaps and limitations as part of the setting design. There is no one ultimate, must-play Arcane Background.
TRAPPINGS
The trappings detailed below are available in Hell-frost. A mage or priest can learn the same spell multiple times with a different trapping each time, so long as his Arcane Background allows for this variation.
The GM has the fi nal word on when trapping bonuses apply, and whether a particular mage or cleric can use any given trapping. For instance, a fi re trapping on bolt makes perfect sense, but a confusion spell shouldn’t cause a foe to ignite. Rather, it temporarily distracts him with fl ickering fl ames in front of his eyes.
Acid: The spell eats through intervening matter, giv-ing offensive damage-causing spells AP 2. This stacks with any other AP bonuses granted to the spell.
Air: A tremendous blast of air buffets over your foes. Everyone affected must make an Agility check or be knocked prone.
Cold: Victims must make a Vigor roll, –2 if the spell-caster scored a raise. The victim can add bonuses for cold weather clothing. On a failure, he suffers the chills and must redraw any action cards over 10, not including Jokers. This effect lasts until the end of the next round.
Coldfi re: Anything affected by the power may catch fi re. See the Savage Worlds rulebook.
Darkness/Light: These trappings dim the vision of your foes or dazzle them. Anyone hit by a spell using this trapping must make a Spirit roll. Failure means victims are at –2 to actions related to sight (including Fighting, Shooting, and Throwing) until the end of the next round.
Armor and defl ection spells with a darkness trapping also bestow +2 to Stealth rolls. Those with a light trap-ping suffer a –2 penalty.
Earth/Water: Offensive spells can cause nonlethal damage. The caster must specify lethal or nonlethal dam-age before he makes his casting roll.
Electricity: Anyone wearing metal armor or holding a metal weapon affected by a damage-causing spell us-ing this trapping suffers an additional d6 damage. For nondamaging powers, like stun, there is no extra effect (the electricity is the reason for the spell’s effect).
Electrical armor and barrier spells cause attackers us-ing metal melee weapons who make a successful Fight-ing attack against the spell’s target to make a Vigor roll or be knocked back 1” and fall prone. If their Vigor die is a 1, regardless of the Wild Die, they are Shaken as well.
Fire: Anything affected by the power may catch fi re. See the Savage Worlds rulebook.
Heat: Heat causes nonlethal damage. Victims have no chance of catching fi re. A heat barrier causes 2d4 dam-age to anyone trying to jump through.
Ice: One obvious thing about ice is that it is slippery. Blast, bolt, burst, and prolonged blast make the affected area slippery. Each bolt affects a 1” square, whereas blast and burst affects the area under the Template. Anything moving through the affected area treats it as smooth ice (see page 122).
SPELLS
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
This effect lasts until the caster’s next action card for Instant spells (or start of the next round if he is Inca-pacitated in the meantime) or until the spell ends for Maintained spells.
Necromancy: Most necromancy spells can involve summoning fell spirits or producing life-draining energy. Every wound infl icted on a victim, heals the mage that many wounds (if he has any).
Sound: This power relies on shockwaves of sound, creating an enormous boom that can rattle the bones of its victims. Those affected by this power must make a Vigor roll or be deafened for d6 hours. Deafened charac-ters are treated as if they have the Major Hard of Hearing Hindrance.
NEW & ALTERED SPELLS
Many new spells are available in Hellfrost. All spells from the Savage Worlds rulebook are also available, though some have changed due to the removal of Power Points in the setting (see below). Mages and clerics are restricted in which spells they may actually learn by their Arcane Background.
Altered Spells: The following spells have different effects due to the removal of Power Points: beast friend, blast, bolt, entangle, shape change, and teleport. Chang-es are detailed in the text below.
Note on Invisibility: Having invisibility Maintained all day and being able to act without being seen sounds tempting, but it is not without drawbacks.
Your allies likely cannot see you, so they cannot target area-effect spells to avoid you. Likewise, Touch spells in combat are hard to place on you.
Unless you stand still and touch your comrade or call out, spellcasters must make a Notice roll (at –4 or –6) to fi nd you fi rst. Enemies who see a spellcaster casting a Touch spell also know where you are, especially if the trappings cause a visible effect, like swathing you in light for an instant.
Allies also have diffi culty treating wounds they cannot see, and so have either an additional –4 or –6 penalty on Healing rolls.
AIM
Rank: Novice Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Ghostly hand, gust of wind, fi ery trail,
magnetic attraction, “lucky” arrow. Some attacks can do with a helping hand—in this
case, quite literally. The caster of this spell calls upon a supernatural “hand” to guide the fl ight of a weapon.
Aim increases a hero’s chance to hit with a thrown weapon or missile weapon. It has no effect on targeted spells, but it does work with siege weapons. The bonus is +2 for a success, and +4 for a raise.
ALTERED SENSES
Rank: Novice Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Eyes glow red or yellow, or become those
of an animal. Few races can see well at night, and even fewer in
total darkness. With a success, the target gains either Infravision or
Low Light Vision, determined by the caster at the time of casting. With a raise, he gains both (giving him no penal-ties in Dim or Dark Lighting, and –3 in Pitch Darkness against heat-producing targets).
ANALYZE FOE
Rank: Seasoned Range: Sight Duration: Instant Trappings: Gestures, whispered words, hard stare. Knowledge is power. Being able to judge the relative
strength of a foe before engaging him in combat can be highly advantageous.
With a successful arcane skill roll, the character dis-cerns the number of Edges and Hindrances or special abilities possessed by one target, chosen at the time of casting, as well the die type of his highest attack skill. He doesn’t learn which skill is linked to the die type, however. On a raise, he knows the name of all the Edges and Hindrances or special abilities, but not their specifi c game mechanics, and the target’s attack skill dice.
This spell does not in any way affect the target, and thus it allows no toll to resist.
NAMING SPELLS
As in the regular rules, spells listed in this setting are given a functional name. This is to help you, the player, remember what your spells do. Your character, of course, doesn’t understand game me-chanics. Likewise, the character is unlikely to call his bolt spell “bolt.” Players should give their spells cool names appropriate to their arcane type, and describe the trappings. For instance, a coldfi re trapping on a bolt spell might just be a ball of swirling blue fi re, but it could also be a fl aming yeti’s claw or a screaming Hellfrost dragonhead. As for the name, it might be called “ Hellfrost Breath,” “Yeti’s Claws,” or just “ Coldfi re Bolt.” All add fl avor that we, as game designers, don’t have room to detail in our products because of all the other cool things we have to include. In the interests of making your game more enjoy-able, think of cool names and trappings for all your hero’s spells. You never know, your GM may even reward your hero for the effort.
SPELLS
ANIMATE WAR TREE
Rank: Heroic Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Tree becomes covered in runes, warps
into a “tree man.” War trees are semi-sentient, animated trees, created
usually only in desperate times of need. With a success, the hero awakens one tree (which
must be taller than 30’) he is touching as a war tree (see Hellfrost Bestiary). On a raise, the animated tree is a Wild Card. At the end of the spell’s duration, the war tree transforms back into a regular tree. If the war tree is killed before this time, the spell is automatically ended.
ARCANE RESISTANCE
Rank: Seasoned Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Runes or glyphs on skin, radiates faint
shimmer, eyes glow red, yellow, or black. Arcane resistance is a bane of spellcasters, since it
reduces their effectiveness to infl ict harm. For the dura-tion of the spell, the target has the benefi ts of the Arcane Resistance Edge, or the Improved version if the caster scores a raise.
The benefi ts do not stack if the target already has either Edge. In such cases, the highest modifi ers apply. Thus, a hero with Arcane Resistance who gains the Im-proved version through this spell gains only +4 modi-fi ers to resist magic, not +6.
AURA
Rank: Seasoned Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Cold, coldfi re, divine energy, electricity,
fi re, heat. The target of this spell is swathed in an aura, which
can damage foes. At the end of the target’s movement, all adjacent char-
acters suffer 2d6 damage. This spell affects friend and foe alike. The target of the spell is unaffected by the aura, even if he has a specifi c weakness to the aura.
BANISH
Rank: Veteran Range: Spirit Duration: Instant Trappings: Arcane gesture, liturgy, opens portal. Banish opens a temporary gateway to another realm,
allowing a spellcaster to force demons, elementals, and spirits back to their own domain. Only creatures with the Demon, Elemental, or Ethereal Special Abilities are affected by this spell.
This spell is an opposed roll of the caster’s arcane skill versus the target’s Spirit. The user must score a success and beat the target’s roll to succeed in the banishing. With success, the target is immediately returned to its own realm. The spell does not keep a spirit tethered to its own realm, however, and if a suitable portal exists, the unearthly entity can return to Rassilon unhindered in any way.
BATTLE SONG
Rank: Seasoned Range: Special Duration: Maintained Trappings: Poetry, battle chant. This spell, beloved of warlike Saxa skalds and priests
of Tiw, god of war, causes the targets to fl y into a battle frenzy.
Every creature within a Medium Burst Template cen-tered on the caster, apart from the caster, is granted the Berserk Edge for the duration of the spell. On a raise, the
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
targets immediately go berserk, as per the Edge. Unwill-ing recipients are allowed a Spirit roll opposed by the caster’s arcane skill to resist. This spell affects friends and foe alike.
By taking a -2 penalty to his arcane skill roll, the spellcaster increases the area of effect to a Large Burst Template.
* BEAST FRIEND
Rank: Novice Range: Smarts x 100 yards Duration: Maintained Trappings: The mage concentrates and gestures with
his hands. This spell allows mages to speak with and guide the
actions of nature’s beasts. It works only on creatures with animal intelligence, not humanoids. Nor does it work on conjured, magical, or otherwise “unnatural” animals.
The target must be within the sorcerer’s range—it is not conjured.
The size of the beast being controlled imparts a modi-fi er on the caster. For each +2 points of positive Size, there is a cumulative –1 penalty. A large bear (Size +2) gives a –1 penalty. Treat negative Size as Size +0.
Swarms may also be controlled. Small swarms give no penalty, Medium a –1, and Large –2. Thus a single rat gives no penalty to control; neither does a small swarm of the creatures.
BECALM
Rank: Novice Range: Sight Duration: Maintained Trappings: Caster stands on deck and sucks in air,
arcane gestures, runes. Becalm affects a single sailed-ship of any size, halving
its Top Speed and Acceleration for the duration. A ship may be affected by multiple castings of this spell, though neither Top Speed nor Acceleration may ever be reduced below 1. It has no effect on oared vessels.
Becalm also adds +2 to a ship’s Boating totals in a storm, whether magical or natural.
The caster suffers a penalty to his arcane skill roll equal to one-quarter of the ship’s base Toughness (ig-nore Armor), rounded down.
BLADEBREAKER
Rank: Seasoned Range: Smarts Duration: Instant Trappings: Weapon rusts, breaks in half, turns to
water, turns to ice and shatters, vanishes in a puff of smoke.
Also known as assassin’s bane, bladebreaker destroys one weapon within range chosen by the caster. Despite the name, the power works on any type of weapon, but
only on weapons. It has no effect on armor, shields, mundane tools, wands, and the like. A heahwisard’s staff is immune to this spell due to its special nature.
The caster makes an arcane skill roll opposed by the damage die type of the target weapon. Thus, a maul would roll a d8, a short sword a d6, and so on. With a success, the weapon is permanently destroyed.
Relics have a bonus to their roll equal to any fl at attack roll modifi er, in addition to any bonuses gained from a higher damage die. For instance, a long sword relic that granted +1 to Fighting and damage die would roll d8+1 to resist this power. See the Hellfrost Bestiary for more details on relics.
* BLAST
Rank: Seasoned Range: 24/48/96 Duration: Instant Trappings: Balls of fi re, ice, light, darkness, colored
bolts, swarm of insects. Blast is an area effect power that can put down many
opponents at once. The character fi rst picks where he wants to center the blast, then makes the appropriate skill roll. Normal ranged attack modifi ers apply.
The area of effect is a Medium Burst Template. If the roll is failed, the blast deviates as a launched projectile. Targets within the blast suffer 2d6 damage.
Additional Effects: With a –1 penalty to the casting roll, the blast does 3d6 damage or the size is increased to a Large Burst Template. For a –2 penalty, it does both.
BLESS/PANIC
Rank: Seasoned Range: Spirit Duration: Maintained Trappings: Prayer, words of encouragement. Being able to face down a fearsome foe without run-
ning in terror is half the battle. With bless, every ally of the caster within range of the
spell when it is cast gains +2 to Guts rolls, +4 with a raise. Panic lowers Guts for all enemies within range of the spell by a similar amount.
BODYGUARD
Rank: Novice Range: Adjacent square Duration: Special Trappings: Model soldier. Most spellcasters are not usually adept in melee com-
bat and cannot always rely on their companions to save them. This power provides the hero with a dependable bodyguard, summonable in an instant.
To cast the spell, the hero simply throws a model sol-dier on the ground and recites a short incantation. When the fi gure strikes the ground, it transforms into a sturdy warrior, completely under the hero’s control. With a
SPELLS
raise on the casting roll, the bodyguard is a Wild Card. When wounded, the soldier crumbles to dust—subse-quent castings require another fi gure. Each fi gure costs the hero 10 gs.
BODYGUARD Attributes: Agility d6, Smarts d6, Spirit d6, Strength d8, Vigor d8 Skills: Fighting d6, Notice d6 Pace: 6; Parry: 6; Toughness: 10 (4) Gear: Long sword (Str+d8), medium shield (+1 Parry). Treasure: None. Special Abilities: * Armor +4: Stone skin. * Construct: +2 to recover from being Shaken; no ad-
ditional damage from called shots; piercing attacks do half damage; constructs do not suffer from poison or disease.
* Fearless: Bodyguards are immune to fear and Intimi-dation.
* Shieldwall: So long as the bodyguard is adjacent to the caster, attacks against the hero suffer a –1 pen-alty. The bodyguard will not use this ability to defend other characters.
* BOLT
Rank: Novice Range: 12/24/48 Duration: Instant Trappings: Fire, ice, light, darkness, colored bolts,
insects. Bolt is a standard attack power of wizards, and can
also be used for ray guns, bursts of energy, streaks of holy light, and other ranged attacks. The damage of the bolt is 2d6.
Additional Bolts: The character may cast up to 3 bolts, rolling an additional arcane skill die per bolt after the fi rst but still with a single Wild Die. The bolts may be spread among targets as the character chooses. Firing the additional bolts does not incur any autofi re penalties, but any results of Backlash are cumulative, and multiple Shaken results count as a damaging effect for causing a wound.
Additional Damage: The character may also increase the damage by one die type (2d8) by taking a –1 penalty on his arcane skill dice. By taking a –2 penalty, they may increase the damage by two die types (2d10). This may be combined with the additional bolts.
BRIDGE
Rank: Seasoned Range: Smarts Duration: Maintained Trappings: Glowing bridge, creation of an ice or
wooden structure. This spell works much the same as barrier, except
it erects horizontal rather than vertical walls. However, each section is 1 yard (0.5”) wide and 4 yards long (2”). When used to bridge a gap, both ends must touch a solid surface. The center does not need to be supported in any way.
For all intents and purposes the bridge is a real, if temporary, structure. Some trappings, such as fi re, do not allow travel across them, but may have other uses (see below). Physical bridges have a Toughness of 10 per game inch. The loss of a single segment causes catastrophic failure of the entire bridge, ending the spell. When the duration ends, the bridge vanishes without warning.
Bridge can be cast on an already solid fl oor, with ef-fects varying by trapping. A coldfi re bridge gives all those crossing it a risk of catching fi re (check for each inch), an ice bridge is slippery (as rough ice), thorns count as dif-fi cult terrain, and so on. Check with the GM what effect your trapping may have.
CHAMPION OF THE FAITH
Rank: Seasoned Range: Self Duration: Maintained Trappings: Holy aura. This spell grants the cleric divine favor. For the du-
ration of the spell, the caster gains the benefi ts of the Champion or Holy Warrior Edge, chosen at the time of casting.
This does not stack if the target already has the cho-sen Edge. Casters with neither Edge may pick either one, regardless of whether they are a priest or paladin.
CHARISMATIC AURA
Rank: Novice Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Commanding voice, intense looks, charm-
ing personality. This spell increases the charisma of the target. For the
duration of the spell, the target gains +1 Charisma with a success or +2 on a raise.
CONFUSION
Rank: Seasoned Range: Smarts x 2 Duration: Maintained Trappings: Dazed look, loss of coordination. Those of weak mind are playthings for powerful
wizards. Whereas puppet allows a wizard to control a victim’s mind, this power simply overloads it.
The caster must pick a single target within range and make an arcane skill roll opposed by the victim’s Smarts. If successful, the mage causes the victim to lose concentration and coordination. The victim’s trait rolls are made at –2 for the duration, –4 on a raise.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
CORPSE SENSES
Rank: Seasoned Range: Smarts x 100 yards Duration: Maintained Trappings: Chanting, staring into a mirror, concen-
tration. Necromancers often guard their tombs with undead,
and this spell allows them to use their minions as a set of roving senses. The power only works on corpses the caster himself has animated.
For the duration of the spell, the caster uses the senses of the target as if they were his own. He sees what the un-dead sees, hears what it hears, and so on. The caster has no control over the corpse and cannot speak through it. Should the undead wander out of range, the connection is instantly severed.
DETECT/CONCEAL
Rank: Novice Range: Smarts x 2 Duration: Maintained Trappings: Whispered words, gestures, pinging
noise. This spell replaces detect/conceal arcana. It uses the
same basic game mechanics, except, when detecting, the character must name the type of object he seeks when casting. He can be vague (arcane, traps, secret doors, or gold) or specifi c (Baron Gustbran or an orc chieftain). To duplicate the regular power, the hero merely states the object he seeks is “magic” when he casts. With a –2 penalty on the arcane skill roll, the objects become vis-ible to anyone.
While Maintained, any object of the appropriate type entering the area of effect automatically registers with the mage (or others, if he took the casting penalty).
On common use of this power is detecting magic (the standard detect arcana power). Once the spell is active, the caster can focus on specifi c items. By making a Smarts roll as an action, he can discern one power or ability of the object with a success, or all powers with a raise. This only works on inanimate objects (such as cloaks or swords), not living creatures.
The power can also be reversed to conceal a single item, being, or effect. This work exactly as conceal ar-cana in the main rules.
DISEASE
Rank: Seasoned Range: Spirit Duration: Special Trappings: Cough, pustules, fever, wasting sickness. This vile power is known only to clerics of the Ver-
min Lord. The caster makes a Faith roll opposed by the victim’s Vigor. With a success, the victim develops some sort of illness or disease and takes an automatic level of Fatigue.
Each week thereafter, the victim must make a Vigor roll, –2 if the caster won the opposed roll with a raise, or suffer another level of Fatigue. This can lead to Death. With a success, the Fatigue penalty drops one level. Only when all Fatigue brought on by this spell is removed is the victim cured.
Healing can be used to remove the disease. In this instance, it is treated as per the rules for the dispel spell, with a success removing the cause. Fatigue then recovers at the rate of one level per day. Dispel itself cannot be used to treat the disease.
ELEMENTAL FORM
Rank: Veteran Range: Self Duration: Maintained Trappings: Physical nature changes to appropriate
element. Powerful elementalists have a strong link to the el-
emental realms, and can convert their own body into elemental matter, if only for a short while.
For the duration of the spell, the caster gains the Special Abilities of the appropriate elemental type. He retains his own traits, Hindrances, Edges, and Size.
ENERGY IMMUNITY
Rank: Seasoned Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Wall of opposite energy, mystic shield,
invisible servant, runic armor. This spell protects the target from one element or
trapping type, chosen during the casting. Unless other-wise listed above, the caster may pick any element or trapping type. The GM should adjudicate trappings that do not easily fi t. For instance, a bolt spell using fl ying daggers should fall under earth because the dagger is made of metal, whereas a rainbow burst should probably come under light.
For the duration of the spell, the target suffers only half damage from this source, no damage with a raise. Note that this spell only stops direct attacks, making it the opposite of environmental protection.
ENHANCE UNDEAD
Rank: Seasoned Range: Smarts Duration: Special Trappings: Runes engraved on undead, chanting. This unusual spell allows a necromancer to enhance
the abilities of an undead of any sort (and yes, undead casters can augment themselves).
Each casting allows the necromancer to give an un-dead an advancement as if it were a character. So, the undead can have an increased attribute or extra skills, or even gain a new Edge. The target does not have to meet
SPELLS
the requirements for an Edge, but the caster must meet the Rank requirement.
The caster can affect more than one undead at a time, but each undead after the first gives a cumula-tive –1 penalty to the arcane skill roll, and all undead must receive the same enhance-ment. This counts as a single use of the spell for the purposes of main-tenance.
With a success, the dead remain enhanced for 1 hour. With a raise, they remain enhanced for 1d6 hours. With two raises, they remain enhanced for an entire day.
Certain powerful necromancers may have improved versions of this power that are easier to cast and cre-ate permanent enhancements.
*ENTANGLE
Rank: Novice Range: Smarts Duration: Special Trappings: Glue bomb, vines,
handcuffs, spider webs This power allows the character to
restrain a target with snaking vines, lengths of hair, spider webs, or some other vine-like trapping.
The arcane skill roll is opposed by the target’s Agility. Success indi-cates partial restraint so that the tar-get suffers a –2 penalty to Pace and skills linked to Agility and Strength. A raise restrains the target fully. He cannot move or use any skills linked to Agility or Strength (Parry drops to 2, but attackers do not gain the Drop).
Each following round, an entangled target may make a Strength or Agility roll to break free. Other characters may also attempt to free the ensnared person by making a Strength roll at –2.
Entangle targets a single Small or Medium opponent. With a –1 penalty to the arcane skill roll, it affects ev-eryone in a Medium Burst Template or a single Large creature. With a –2 penalty, it affects everyone in a Large Burst Template or a single Huge creature.
ETHEREALNESS/CORPOREALNESS
Rank: Seasoned Range: Smarts Duration: Maintained Trappings: Wraith-like form, translucent, turns to an
elemental form. With a successful arcane skill roll, the user becomes
ethereal. He is unable to affect the world through mate-rial means, and it in turn cannot affect him. He can walk
through walls, and non-magical weapons pass straight through him. Any items carried at the time of casting are also ethereal.
The caster may cast magic, however, and is susceptible to magic attacks, including physical powers, such as bolt, and relics.
Should the mage become corporeal “inside” someone or something, both he and his victim suffers damage. A hand causes 1 wound to each, an arm causes 2 wounds, both arms cause 3 wounds, and the whole body causes 4 wounds.
The reverse of this spell, corporealness, removes an ethereal creature’s Ethereal Special Ability for the dura-tion. During this time, the target being is treated as if it were fl esh and blood.
FARSIGHT
Rank: Novice Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Eyes become those of an animal, glow. Forewarned is forearmed, as the saying goes. This
spell endows the target with the eyesight of an eagle. Within his Smarts x 2 he receives a +2 to Notice rolls,
+4 on a raise. He can discern small details up to fi ve miles (such as the heraldry of advancing knights), and can pick out individual fi gures up to 10 miles, though
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
he cannot make out any specifi c details, including race or sex. Poor lighting affects the caster’s vision as normal. This spell has no effect on blind targets, not does it com-pensate for the One Eye Hindrance.
FATIGUE
Rank: Seasoned Range: 12/24/48 Duration: Instant Trappings: Victim chokes or drowns, energy siphoned
by a dirge, temperature drops. This power creates an area of effect that can fatigue
victims. With a successful casting, the spell affects a Medium
Burst Template, or Large with a raise. Fatigue deviates as an area-effect attack.
Every character within the Template must make a Vigor roll opposed by the caster’s arcane skill roll. On a failure, affected targets gain one level of Fatigue, to a maximum of Exhausted. Fatigue recovers at the rate of one level per 5 minutes of rest.
FEAST
Rank: Novice Range: Smarts Duration: Instant Trappings: Food appears from nowhere, berries
grow on bushes, game animals appear. Sometimes heroes run out of food, and that’s when
the feast spell comes in handy. The caster summons 5 pounds of basic food (not
water) per character Rank of the caster. Food cannot be summoned inside any object, but instead appears on the ground at the appropriate range. If no space exists in which the feast can appear, the spell is treated as if the arcane skill roll failed. Any food not consumed by midnight, spoils.
FOG CLOUD
Rank: Veteran Range: Self Duration: Maintained Trappings: Fog rises from the ground. Weather magic is rare, powerful, and requires prepa-
ration. This spell creates an area of fog around the caster for one mile per character Rank. Each use requires the mage to spend four rounds working his magic before rolling his arcane skill. If the roll is successful, an existing storm dissipates or a new storm appears overhead with supernatural speed.
Inside the fog cloud the lighting quality is reduced by one step (toward Pitch Darkness), two steps with a raise. So on a sunny day, a success reduces the visibility within the cloud to Dim. On a moonlit night, a raise would make the area Pitch Darkness. The caster suffers the penalties when inside the fog, having no special immunity.
FORTUNE’S FAVORED
Rank: Seasoned Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Victim glows briefl y, catches glimpses of
future events, plain lucky. Some heroes are born with a manifest destiny; others
need a hand in avoiding an early fate. With a successful arcane skill roll, a target of this spell
that spends a benny and fails the reroll, may immediately make another reroll without having to spend an addi-tional benny. Only one free roll per benny is allowed. If the second roll fails, the hero must spend another benny to reroll again.
GIFT OF BATTLE
Rank: Novice Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Battle cry, rallying speech, tactical in-
sight. This spell grants the target tactical insight and leader-
ship qualities. Success allows the recipient to pick one Leadership
Edge. A raise means he can take two Edges. He need not meet any requirements except those of other Edges. For instance, the hero cannot gain Fervor unless he scores a raise and takes Command fi rst, or already has the Com-mand Edge.
GLYPH
Rank: Veteran Range: Special Duration: Special Trappings: Drawn or inscribed glyph. A glyph spell is a way of storing a single spell for ac-
tivation under a predetermined trigger. Glyphs must be cast simultaneously with a single spell the caster knows. Thus, the Combine Spell Edge is required to use this spell.
Glyphs remain magically charged until activated, which requires a specifi c trigger. A trigger must contain no more than 10 words, and no more than two clauses. Glyphs aren’t intelligent, and although they can recog-nize their caster they cannot distinguish between other individuals or races. Example triggers are, “Activate when anyone but me opens that door,” “Activate when touched by anyone but me,” “Activate when I cry ‘Help,’” and so on.
A hero may have a maximum number of glyphs cast at anyone time equal to half his arcane skill die. They never count as Maintained spells.
Once triggered, the spell stored in the glyph goes off as normal. It uses the traits of the caster at the time of the glyph’s creation. Once activated, the glyph loses its magic. Maintained spells last for one hour once activated.
SPELLS
The caster of a glyph, assuming he is alive, always knows when a glyph has been triggered, regardless of distance, though not which specifi c glyph.
Glyphs can be dispelled, but they cannot be disarmed by mundane means. The caster may erase a glyph he has created simply by touching it and dissolving the magic (an action). He may also temporarily negate a glyph, thus allowing comrades to pass in safety but not those following him. Negating and reactivating a glyph in this manner takes an action each and requires the glyph to be touched.
GRAVESPEAK
Rank: Seasoned Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Runes carved on bodily remains, black
candles, “leather” books. It is said the dead know many secrets, and through
the black arts a mage can reach beyond death to contact departed souls. Though not evil, many good spellcasters avoid using this power, as there are risks involved.
In order for this spell to work, it must be directed toward a particular soul. The caster must either know the name of the deceased or possess a personal item, which includes their corpse, or any part of it at least, as well as treasured items.
If the spell succeeds, the caster hears a ghostly voice. One question may be asked for per die step of the caster’s Spirit, regardless of how long the spell is maintained.
The spirit contacted is not necessarily friendly and can lie, but it may not refuse to answer or make guesses. The GM must adjudicate what information the entity knows—the spirit is not omnipotent and knows only what it knew in life up to the moment of its death.
A roll of 1 on the caster’s arcane skill, regardless of Wild Die, may summon up a demon or other hostile en-tity. While it cannot directly affect the caster, it will try to convince him it is the person he sought, then feed him inaccurate or dangerous information, perhaps seeking to lead the character to his death.
GREATER ZOMBIE
Rank: Heroic Range: Spirit x 2 Duration: Special Trappings: Dark liturgy, blood, special powder. This spell functions exactly as per the zombie spell,
but allows the caster to animate corpses as barrow dwell-ers, bog men, drownlings, or gorta wights, depending on how it lived and died (GM’s decision). It cannot create bloodmists, frost wights, vampires, or other undead.
Powerful, evil NPCs may know a version for creating such monstrosities. Locating the source of their wisdom and destroying it, or perhaps gaining it for one’s own purposes, would make for an exciting, and likely very dangerous, adventure.
GROWTH/SHRINK
Rank: Seasoned Range: Smarts x 2 Duration: Maintained Trappings: Gestures, words of power, potions. Growth doubles the height and mass of the target.
The target increases his size by one step on a success, two on a raise. Each step of Size gains the target a one step increase to Strength and also a point of Toughness. This spell may be cast multiple times on the same target, though the caster must track each casting separately.
If the target reaches a size between +4 and +7 he is considered Large and fi lls a 2” square on the tactical battle map. Increasing to between +8 and +10 makes him Huge, and he occupies an area 3” square. Each fur-ther increase adds another 1” per level.
Shrink reduces the Size of the recipients by one step or two on a raise, down to a minimum of Size –2 (roughly the size of a rat). Each level of Size reduction reduces the target’s Strength by one die type (minimum of d4) and his Toughness by 1 (minimum of 2). Creatures reduced to Size –2 are Small and are harder to hit. They may also share a space occupied by another character.
Unwilling recipients of either aspect may make a Spirit roll opposed by the caster’s arcane skill roll to resist the effects.
HEAT MASK
Rank: Seasoned Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Slight shimmering, pale skin. Some creatures have the ability to sense body heat,
giving them a distinct advantage in darkness. This spell causes the target’s body temperature to be masked to match that of the surrounding air, thus negating Infravi-sion.
INSIGHT
Rank: Novice Range: Touch Duration: Instant Trappings: Touch object, pale glow, lucky guess,
whispered voices. This spell gives the caster a brief insight into the past
of a person, place or thing. Assuming the spell is successful, the caster gets a vi-
sion, feeling, insight, or “hunch” about some event that happened in the target object or person’s recent past. Raises on the arcane skill roll grant more information at the GM’s discretion.
KNOCKDOWN
Rank: Seasoned Range: Cone Template
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
Duration: Instant Trappings: Rippling earth, buffeting winds, wall of
snow. Knockdown allows wizards to bowl over multiple
foes in a single spell. It is popular with pacifi sts. The caster makes an arcane skill roll. With success,
he places the thin end of a Cone Template in front of him and angles it in whatever direction he wishes. Any character touched by the Template, friend or foe, must make a Strength roll opposed by the caster’s arcane skill roll. On a failure the character is knocked back 1d4” and becomes prone. If he rolls a 1, regardless of his Wild Die, he is Shaken, even if the Wild Die indicated he was not knocked back.
LEAPING
Rank: Novice Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Powerful legs, legs change to an ani-
mal’s. The target of this spell can jump greater distances
than normal. A success doubles his jumping distances, while a raise quadruples them. Modifi ers are applied after running starts are factored in.
LOCK/UNLOCK
Rank: Novice Range: Touch Duration: Special or Instant Trappings: Whispered words, aura around lock Whether guarding valuables or thwarting pursuers,
lock allows the caster to seal a door, treasure chest, or other object with a lock. Attempts to pick or smash the lock suffer a –2 penalty, –4 if the caster got a raise on the casting roll. Also, the locked object gains +2 Toughness, +4 with a raise. The wizard may open his own locks normally. Opening the lock by any means automatically ends the spell.
Unlock opens any mundane lock, though if the lock is particularly complex, the GM may assign penalties to the arcane skill roll. A door sealed with lock gives a –2 or –4 penalty to arcane skill rolls to cast this spell.
LUCK/JINX
Rank: Veteran Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Lucky charm, roll dice, prayer, words of
inspiration or mockery. The target of this spell either becomes fortunate or
unfortunate, depending on the caster’s whim. Recipients of luck roll two dice when making a trait
roll (rolling the Wild Die separately as normal) and take the best. Those cursed with a jinx roll two trait dice and take the worst result.
MEND
Rank: Veteran Range: Touch Duration: Instant Trappings: Vehicle repairs itself. Spellcasters with this spell can actually mend damage
done to a wooden vehicle’s body within the last hour. The caster must concentrate for one full action, then
cast the spell on his next, subtracting a penalty equal to the vehicle’s wounds on his arcane skill roll. A success mends one wound; a raise mends two. The spell has no effect on critical hits. Those must be repaired by normal methods.
MIMIC
Rank: Novice Range: Spirit Duration: Maintained Trappings: Caster glows briefl y, gains hidden knowl-
edge. Mimic allows the spellcaster to duplicate one spell he
has witnessed an opponent using during the current bat-tle. This spell has no effect on monstrous abilities other than those listed under Powers, even if they duplicate spell effects. Spells augmented by Augment Staff or Spell Finesse are gained without the benefi ts of these Edges.
When mimic is cast, the possessor of the spell the caster wishes to mimic must be within range. Mimic does not directly affect the target and requires no op-posed roll. The hero must be of suitable Rank to cast the spell; otherwise, it cannot be mimicked.
With a success, the mage gains the use of the mim-icked spell. When the mimic duration expires, the hero loses use of the spells he gained through this power. Any active mimicked spells are instantly ended at this time as well. Each casting of mimic allows one specifi c spell to be copied—a mage who wants to mimic two spells, for instance, must cast and maintain this spell twice.
MIND RIDER
Rank: Veteran Range: Smarts Duration: Maintained Trappings: Trance, runes on face, face of caster su-
perimposed with that of target. Mind rider is the ability to place part of your mind
inside someone else’s body. If the victim is an unwilling subject (which includes anyone whose permission has not been granted), this requires an opposed roll of the character’s arcane skill against the victim’s Spirit.
A mind rider gains no control over his victim, but he has access to his victim’s senses and can see, hear, smell, taste, and feel everything his victim does.
Although very handy for spying, it has a drawback. If the victim suffers an injury, including being Shaken by physical injury, the caster must make a Spirit roll or be
SPELLS
Shaken. Contact is immediately severed if the roll fails. A penalty of –1 applies for each wound the victim suffers. If the victim dies, the caster is automatically Shaken (and contact is broken) and cannot attempt to recover for 1d6 rounds.
NEGATE ARCANA
Rank: Veteran Range: Smarts Duration: Maintained Trappings: Arcane sign, blast of magical energy, fi eld
of shimmering lights. Whereas arcane resistance makes
a mage’s opponents harder to affect, negate arcana temporarily denies spellcasters access to the magical fl ow. Relics and alchemical magic items, which already have their magical en-ergy bound into them, are unaffected by this spell.
With a successful arcane skill roll, the caster places a Medium Burst Tem-plate anywhere in range, or a Large Burst Template if he takes a –2 penalty to his arcane skill roll.
Any use of magic in or through the Template is treated as if were be-ing countered by an automatic dispel power based on the caster’s arcane skill die. This affects friend as well as foe.
NIGHTMARE
Rank: Seasoned Range: Smarts x 1 mile Duration: Special Trappings: Runes, blood, sticking
pins in a doll. This insidious spell causes the vic-
tim to suffer terrible nightmares, pre-venting him from sleeping. The caster must know the name of the victim and possess something that belonged to him (a clock of hair, item of clothing, and the like), but need not know his exact location. The victim must be in range when the spell is cast. The spell is treated as Maintained until the victim sleeps next.
When the victim next goes to sleep, he must make a Spirit roll, –2 if the caster scored a raise. On a success, he tosses and turns, but otherwise sleeps through the nightmare with no lasting effect. Should the Spirit roll fail, the character has terrifying nightmares and must make a roll on the Fright Table. With a critical failure, he rolls on the Fright Table at +2.
In all cases of failure, the character gets no ben-efi t from sleeping. Check out the Sleep rules in Savage Worlds for details.
PRECOGNITION
Rank: Veteran Range: Special Duration: Instant Trappings: Lucky guess, natural omens, glimpse for-
ward in time, rune stones. The character has a limited ability to glance into the
future and make minor manipulations to the time stream. If the casting is successful, the caster may rearrange any two Action Cards (four with a raise) for any ally or foe (including himself) as he sees fi t on the round after the spell is cast. Cards must be moved before anyone acts.
PROLONGED BLAST
Rank: Veteran Range: 24/48/96 Duration: Maintained Trappings: Coldfi re, electricity, fi re, cold, acid pool,
jagged spikes bursting from ground. Prolonged blast creates an area through which any
creature passing takes damage. The spell functions ex-actly as per blast in terms of casting, but the Template remains in play for the duration of the spell.
Any creature entering or that begins its turn in the Template takes damage. Reroll damage each time a crea-ture is affected.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
QUAKE
Rank: Veteran Range: Smarts x 3 Duration: Instant Trappings: The mage smacks the ground with both
hands clasped, bang staff on ground, words of power. Quake causes a tiny but powerful earthquake that
can crush foes and level buildings. It works only upon solid earth—not sand, water, wood, fl oors, or any other substances.
The area of effect is a Large Burst Template centered within the mage’s Range. Victims within the template must make an Agility roll or fall into the hole where the earth and stone crush them for 2d10 damage. Those who make the roll cling to the sides and may climb out on their next action. Those who succeed with a raise jump free and may act normally on their next action.
Walls crumble and are breached with this spell, open-ing a hole as wide across as the earthquake.
REFUGE
Rank: Seasoned Range: Smarts Duration: 12 hours Trappings: Wooden hut, small stead, igloo, vegeta-
tion moves to cover an area. Being caught in the open at night or during a storm
can spell death, even in the Hearthlands. This spell creates a shelter measuring approximately
ten feet long, six feet wide, and six feet high. The shelter has Toughness 10. No magical heating is provided, but the shelter is well insulated. The shelter grants a +2 bo-nus to Vigor rolls to resist the cold, or +4 with a raise. A fi re in the shelter grants a further +2 bonus.
The spell lasts for 12 hours. During this time, it is treated as being Maintained by the caster. The caster may sleep while the spell is active and may end the spell any-time he wishes as a free action. Recasting the spell on the same location before the current spell expires increases the duration by another 12 hours from the time of cast-ing. Typically, a caster does this after 11 hours to get the most from his spell.
REGENERATE
Rank: Heroic Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Wounds heal supernaturally fast. Regenerate allows the target to heal wounds with
supernatural speed. During the spell’s duration, the victim may make a
free Soak roll at –2, each time he is wounded. With a raise on the arcane skill roll, this roll is made with no modifi er. No other modifi ers to Soak rolls apply. Bennies may be spent to make a Soak roll as normal if the free roll fails.
If the target is killed before the duration expires, the spell is automatically negated. No known spell can re-turn the dead to life (except as an undead).
SACRIFICE
Rank: Veteran Range: Self Duration: Special Trappings: Spirit of victim fl ows into caster, surge of
power. Sacrifi ce is a power purely for the “dark side.” It al-
lows a dark spellcaster to sacrifi ce a sentient being in return for power. Such an act is inherently evil, and the mark of a true villain.
So long as the caster Maintains the spell, he gains a +1 bonus to his next arcane skill roll for each Spirit die type of the next sentient being he kills (so killing a peas-ant with Spirit d6 is worth +2). If the spell ends before the caster can use this bonus, it is lost. Only one victim can be killed per casting of this spell, the sacrifi ce spell being canceled as soon as the bonus is used or the dura-tion expires, whichever comes fi rst.
SANCTUARY
Rank: Novice Range: Special Duration: Instant Trappings: Caster vanishes in puff of smoke, sucked
away in a whirlwind, transforms into a column of fi re. When the going gets tough, the wise go somewhere
safer. This spell returns the caster to a safe location. Characters with Faith are instantly transported to their
nearest temple, no matter the distance. Mages appear in a place they have turned into a sanctuary. If the mage has a permanent abode, then he is transported there. Mages without a permanent sanctuary can create one by spend-ing a day attuning to the location and spending 100 gs on various exotic unguents and chalks. A mage may only have one temporary sanctuary at a time.
The caster may try to carry extra people with him, but he incurs a –1 penalty to his casting roll per extra person. Passengers must be adjacent to the caster, or the magic fi eld will not encompass them.
SENTRY
Rank: Seasoned Range: Smarts x 2 Duration: Special Trappings: Circle of chalk, powder, or blood, mystic
rune, staff thrust into ground. Getting a good night’s sleep in the middle of orc
country is easier said than done. Sentry duty is tiring and lonely, and a single sentry nodding off can spell disaster. Sentry provides additional security for the wary traveler. It can also be used to safeguard valuables.
The fi rst version of this spell creates a ghostly sentry
SPELLS
who watches over the camp but cannot move further away from the caster than the caster’s Smarts x 2 in game inches. The sentry has a Notice of d8, or d10 with a raise, is always alert, and suffers no penalties for bad lighting. Despite being visible as a ghostly form, the sentry is not a physical manifestation and cannot be harmed, though it can be dispelled.
The sentry may be given instructions on when to sound the alarm but it is not an intelligent, reasoning being. Instructions may contain no more than 10 words and must be clearly defi ned. For the purposes of identify-ing potential threats, the sentry has the same knowledge of monsters and hazards as the caster.
The second variant protects a single object touched by the caster when he invokes the spell. During the casting, the spellcaster may name a number of individuals equal to half his arcane skill die type who can safely touch the object. Anyone else touching it immediately activates the spell, which alerts the caster to the tampering.
The spell automatically expires at sunset or sunrise, whichever occurs fi rst, and the caster may even sleep while the spell is active. It counts as Maintained for the purposes of disruption and penalties to trait rolls.
* SHAPE CHANGE
Rank: Veteran Range: Self Duration: Maintained Trappings: “Morphing,” talismans, tattoos. Many cultures have legends of shamans or wizards
who can take on the shape of animals. This power does just that. The basic version of the power only allows a user to transform into mundane animals, such as birds, bears, or lions, but more bizarre transmutations are pos-sible. Regardless of the form taken, Wild Card and Extra casters retain that status.
The caster decides which species of creature he wishes to transform into and makes an arcane skill roll. There is a modifi er to the casting roll dependent on the size category of creature the character wishes to change into. Small creatures give no modifi er. Medium creatures have a –1 modifi er, Large creatures –2, and Huge creatures –4.
Becoming an animal with any ability above and be-yond what a mundane animal possesses (as determined by the GM) incurs an additional –2 penalty.
Shapechange can also be used to transform into a member of a race or creature with non-animal intelli-gence at a –2 penalty as well.
Trying to mimic the exact appearance of a specifi c creature or being may also be attempted at a –2 penalty. A success in this case indicates a –4 penalty to Notice rolls to determine the character is not who they appear to be. With a raise, the penalty increases to -6.
Weapons and other personal effects are assumed into the animal’s form and reappear when the power ends, but other objects are dropped.
While transformed, the character retains his own
Smarts, Spirit, and linked skills (though he may not be able to use them since he cannot speak). He gains the animal’s Agility and Strength and linked skills, and can-not use most devices. He has no capacity for speech and cannot use powers, though he may continue to maintain powers previously activated. Vigor is the highest of the hero’s or the creature into which he changes.
The GM has fi nal say on what an animal can and can-not do. A shaman in dog-form might be able to pull the trigger on a shotgun, for instance, but would use a default skill roll of d4-2, as the animal has no Shooting score of its own. The shaman’s Persuasion functions normally, but without speech, the roll might suffer a –4 or worse penalty depending on what he tries to accomplish.
As mentioned above, changing into “unnatural” animals is also possible. In a typical fantasy game, such beasts would include griffi ns, hydras, unicorns, and even dragons. Changing into other species (elves, orcs, sen-tient space aliens) is also possible.
Example: In a desperate situation, Maggie decides to shapechange into the form of the dragon that guards the keep. She is at –4 for the dragon's Huge size, –2 for its special abilities, –2 for its intelligence, and a further –2 for the attempt to mimic a specifi c dragon. She's at a total of a –10 penalty. Let's hope Maggie has lots of bennies.
SILENCE
Rank: Seasoned Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Gestures, enchanted bag to capture
sounds. For ultimate stealth, or to combat hostile mages, this
power creates an area of complete silence equal to a Me-dium Burst Template around a single inanimate object, such as a coin, sword, or article of clothing. With a raise on the casting roll, the spell encompasses a Large Burst Template instead.
Within the template, no sound can be created, although sounds from outside of the zone can still be heard clearly. The zone of silence moves with the object, allowing it to be thrown toward hostile creatures.
Spellcasters who rely on speech fi nd their spells fail automatically, and monsters that use sound-based at-tacks (such as a banshee) are temporarily deprived of their power.
SLUGGISH REFLEXES
Rank: Seasoned Range: Smarts x 2 Duration: Maintained Trappings: Tying a knot in a piece of string, victim is
covered in ice. Skilled fi ghters and monsters with fast refl exes can
strike before lesser beings have time to blink. Slowing their refl exes reduces their advantage.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
The caster makes an arcane skill roll opposed by the target’s Spirit. With success, the target draws one less card for initiative. Victims who only draw one card must draw two and take the lowest. If a victim using the worst of two cards draws a Joker as his fi rst card, he may use it normally and ignore this spell for the round.
SLUMBER
Rank: Seasoned Range: Smarts x 2 Duration: Maintained Trappings: Sing lullaby, gestures, blow powder at
targets. Blasting a hoard of enemies into tiny pieces may be
popular with some mages, but those who favor stealth or have a pacifi stic bent are drawn to this spell.
The character picks where he wants to center the spell and makes an arcane skill roll. Slumber targets a
single Small or Medium opponent. With a –2 penalty to the arcane skill roll it affects everyone in a Medium Burst Template or a single Large creature. With a –4 penalty, it affects everyone in a Large Burst Template or a single Huge creature. Slumber does not affect constructs, de-mons, elementals, fey, plants, or undead.
Victims must make a Spirit roll, or a Spirit roll at –2 if the caster scored a raise. Those who fail instantly fall asleep.
Loud noises awaken victims instantly. So long as one sleeper remains unconscious, the spell is treated as be-ing Maintained. When the duration ends, the sleepers naturally wake up (if any are alive).
SPHERE OF MIGHT
Rank: Veteran Range: Smarts Duration: Maintained Trappings: Swirling rocks, wind laced with ice, cold-
fi re, electricity. This powerful spell creates a sphere of swirling mat-
ter or energy equal to a Small Burst Template centered on the target.
The spell grants two effects. First, the sphere gives attackers a –1 penalty to attack rolls against the target, or –2 on a raise, as they help defl ect incoming blows. Attacks made through the wall by the target suffer similar penalties.
Second, the sphere can be used to harm foes. The template attacks any character, friend or foe, who comes into contact with it. The sphere has a Fighting skill equal to the caster’s arcane skill. Using the sphere in this way does not count as an action for the spell’s recipient. The sphere causes damage equal to the caster’s arcane skill die+d4, +d8 on a raise. Any additional effects of trap-pings (such as coldfi re) also apply.
The sphere moves with the recipient, but only slowly. The recipient may not run or he automatically becomes a victim of the sphere’s attack.
STORM
Rank: Seasoned Range: 10-mile diameter Duration: Maintained Trappings: Swirling storm, blizzard. Controlling the weather requires a powerful magician
and is not without consequences. Storm can be used to create or dispel thunder-
storms or blizzards. Each use requires the mage to spend four rounds working his magic before rolling his arcane skill. If the roll is successful, an existing storm dissipates or a new storm appears overhead with supernatural speed. The size of the storm affected is 10 miles in diameter. The power only works outdoors. In areas where storms do not typically exists, such as a desert, the arcane skill roll is made at –4 and may be attempted only once per day.
SPELLS
When a storm is created, the accompanying rain or snow reduces visibility (treat as Dark Lighting), extin-guishes most normal fi res within 1d10 rounds, and only volatile materials have a random chance of igniting from fi re-based attacks. These conditions infl ict a –1 penalty to most actions due to slipping, diffi culty hearing, and so on. The Game Master must decide if any actions are unaffected.
If the caster scores a raise when summoning the storm, he has created a monstrous tempest. Visibility is reduced to just 12” (and still subject to Dark Lighting) and the ground is quickly covered in snow to a depth of 2d4 feet or turned into a quagmire with lashing rain. All terrain is treated as diffi cult ground. These conditions infl ict a –2 penalty to most actions due to slipping, dif-fi culty hearing, and so on.
STRENGTH OF THE UNDEAD
Rank: Veteran Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Pallid skin, claws, fangs. This unusual power allows the caster to mimic any
one trait or Special Ability of an undead he is touching when he invokes the spell for the duration of the power, two with a raise.
In the case of traits, the mimicked trait replaces the caster’s trait. For instance, a cultist who mimics a vam-pire’s Strength has Strength d12+1 for the duration. The undead does not lose the affected trait or ability.
SUCCOR
Rank: Novice Range: Touch Duration: Instant Trappings: Laying on hands, herbal brews. Succor removes one Fatigue level, or two with a raise.
It does not stop bleeding, remove Shaken conditions, revive characters Incapacitated by wounds, or other-wise heal wounds. Nor does it remove the cause of the Fatigue. A hungry knight, for instance, may not feel as fatigued as he did, but he is still just as hungry.
The roll suffers a penalty equal to the victim’s Fatigue in addition to any wounds or Fatigue the caster might be suffering himself. Thus, a caster trying to recover his own Fatigue suffers double the penalty.
SUMMON BEAST
Rank: Veteran Range: Spirit x 10 yards Duration: Maintained Trappings: The mage concentrates and gestures with
his hands. This spell is an advanced version of beast friend,
and allows mages to summon and guide the actions of nature’s beasts. It works only on natural creatures with
animal (A) intelligence. It does not work on conjured, magical, undead, or otherwise “unnatural” animals. Creatures such as griffi ns and lindwyrms, as well as giant animals, are considered natural beasts in Rassilon.
The size of the beast being summoned imparts a modifi er on the caster. For each two points of positive Size (round up), there is a cumulative –1 penalty. A cave bear (Size +4) gives a –2 penalty. Treat negative Size as Size +0.
Swarms may also be summoned. Swarms covering a Small Template give no penalty, Medium a –1, and Large a –2. Thus a single rat gives no penalty to summon, and neither does a small swarm of the creatures. If the caster wanted a spy, a single rat is less obvious than a swarm.
With a successful arcane skill roll, the creature ap-pears out of thin air anywhere within range and line of sight of the caster, but may not act until the caster’s next initiative card.
The beast remains controlled until the spell duration ends, or it is killed, whichever comes fi rst. Summoned beasts still alive when the spell ends disappear back to their original location. Beast friend cannot be used on creatures summoned by another spellcaster.
SUMMON DEMON
Rank: Veteran Range: Smarts x 2 Duration: Maintained Trappings: Blood, foul incense, sacrifi ces, summon-
ing circle. This dark power summons a fi end from the Abyss.
Summoning a demon, even if for a noble purpose, is con-sidered an evil act by most civilized beings, and should not be undertaken lightly by heroes. After all, the road to the Abyss is paved with good intentions, and intelligent demons are renowned for their trickery and ability to twist demands placed on them to their best advantage.
There is a modifi er to the arcane skill roll—some de-mons are rarer than others or simply harder to enforce your will on and bring to the mortal realm. This is sum-marized in the table below.
With a success, the demon is loosely bound to the summoner’s will for the duration of the spell or until killed, whichever comes fi rst. A hero may banish any demon he has summoned as an action (no roll is re-quired).
Demons only act in accordance with their base desires, however, and can refuse orders. A plague demon, for instance, may refuse to engage in melee combat unless it can be sure that doing so will help spread pestilence. Typically, if a summoner wants a killing machine he sum-mons a chain demon, demonic soldier, lasher demon, or spined demon.
Demons vanish back to the Abyss along with any gear they brought with them when the spell ends or if they die while under its effects. For this reason, a demon which slays its summoner is rewarded only with a trip back to its native plane of existence.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
DEMON SUMMONING TABLE Mod Demon 0 Demonic soldier, steed –1 Chain, changeling, imp, lasher, spined –2 Gluttony, librarian, succubus/incubus –4 Plague, revealer –6 Ice
SUMMON ELEMENTAL
Rank: Veteran Range: Special Duration: Maintained Trappings: Substance of the same type as the elemen-
tal. This power summons forth an elemental under the
command of the summoner. With a success on the arcane skill roll, the summoner calls forth an elemental to serve his will. The elemental remains until the spell duration ends or it is killed, whichever comes fi rst, whereupon it returns to its own realm.
Communication is through a mental link but it is purely one-way—the creature cannot relay its thoughts or even basic information to its summoner. The thoughts of such beings are beyond the ken of mortals.
SUMMON HERALD
Rank: Heroic Range: Spirit Duration: Special Trappings: Prayer, chanting, burning incense. Every deity has a herald, a supernatural creature it
sends to the mortal realm when worshippers cry out for divine aid. The hero can summon the specifi c her-ald of his specifi c deity (see the Hellfrost Bestiary for stats).
Heralds are not tools to be summoned time after time by mortals who cannot fi ght their own battles. The caster suffers a cumulative –2 penalty for each casting of this spell (successful or not) during a single year. When a new calendar year begins, the gods clean the slate, so to speak.
Heralds accept commands only from the summoner, and then only if the requests are within the boundaries of their deity’s faith. Most heralds fi ght alongside a hero only so long as the cause is just.
The spell lasts until the herald is killed or the GM wishes the herald to leave (usually after it completes one task or a day passes). Slain heralds disappear, leaving behind no physical remains. This includes any gear they carry.
* TELEPORT
Rank: Seasoned Range: Special Duration: Instant
Trappings: A cloud of smoke, “phasing” out, change into a bolt of lightning.
Teleport allows a character to disappear and instantly reappear up to 20" away per success and raise. This counts as his movement for the round. Adjacent opponents do not get a free attack against the teleporting character. If the hero wishes to teleport somewhere he can’t see, he must make a Smarts roll at –2. If it is an unknown area he has never seen, the roll is at a –4 penalty.
Failure of either roll means the teleporter has hit an object of some sort. He returns to where he came from and is Shaken. A roll of 1 on the casting die (regardless of the Wild Die) indicates a more serious disaster—in addition to being Shaken and suffering the Siphoning, he also suffers 2d6 damage.
The teleporter can never enter a solid space, even if he tries. The power instantly returns him to his starting location as above.
Carrying Others: The hero can carry other beings with him, but this automatically causes one level of Fatigue per additional “rider.” (More than two may be carried at once, but causes instant Incapacitation.) One Fatigue can be regained for each full hour of rest.
VIPER WEAPON
Rank: Seasoned Range: Spirit x 2 Duration: Maintained Trappings: Weapon transforms into a snake. This spell transforms one weapon into a venomous
snake. It can be used on your weapon or to give an en-emy a nasty surprise.
The caster must pick one weapon within range and make an arcane skill roll. With a success, the weapon transforms into a venomous serpent (use the standard viper stats). The serpent is not under the caster’s control (beast friend can be handy here) and attacks the near-est target, acting on the caster’s Initiative. On a raise the serpent is particularly dangerous and is treated as a Wild Card.
When the snake is killed or the duration ends, it re-verts back to being a weapon. In the former instance, the spell immediately ends.
VOICE ON THE WIND
Rank: Novice Range: Smarts x 50 miles Duration: Instant Trappings: Whispered words, throwing written mes-
sage into the wind, burning a written message. The mage can instantaneously transmit a short mes-
sage to one named person within range of the spell. The mage doesn’t have to know the person’s exact location, but he must know his full name. Trying to send a mes-sage to, “the nearest Hearth Knight,” for instance, would cause the spell to fail.
The length of the message cannot exceed 10 words
SPELLS
per Rank of the caster, to a maximum of 50 words at Legendary. Other spells may not be cast through this power—it only carries messages.
WALL WALKER
Rank: Novice Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Clawed hands, handholds form, sticky
hands. Wall walker allows a wizard to function much like a
human spider. He can stick to any surface, allowing him to climb walls and even hang from the ceiling. The char-acter can move along such surfaces at his normal Pace and may even run.
WANDERING SENSES
Rank: Novice Range: Smarts x 10 Duration: Maintained Trappings: Spectral hand and eyeball appear, blank
stare, concentration. Accurate intelligence can allow a party to avoid trouble
or prepare a suitable reception for approaching foes. Wandering senses allows a character to project his
sense of sight, hearing, and smell. The caster can move his senses 6” each round to the limit of the spell. The senses work as if the character were actually moving. Thus, he cannot see through solid objects, but he can listen at doors.
If the character cannot naturally see in the dark then neither can his wandering senses. Any sensory enhance-ment powers invoked on the caster, such as altered sight or farsight, affect the caster’s wandering senses.
WARDING
Rank: Seasoned Range: Special Duration: Maintained Trappings: Circle of holy water or salt, energy barrier,
pentagram Warding prevents certain creatures from entering the
area of the spell. When cast, the spellcaster must choose Construct, Demon, Elemental, Ethereal, Immunity or Resistance (one specifi c type, such as cold or fi re), Plant, or Undead creatures. The spell functions only against creatures with the chosen Special Ability. Other variants of the spell may exist at the GM’s discretion.
A standard casting creates a warding equal to a Me-dium Burst Template centered on the caster. With a raise on the casting roll, the template increases to a Large Burst Template.
Creatures of the nominated type trying to enter the warding or use Special Abilities at targets inside the warding must fi rst make a Spirit roll as a free action or be unable to do so for the duration of the spell. The
spell does not stop mundane attacks made from outside the warding (a vampire with a bow isn’t affected by an undead warding, for example).
WARRIOR’S GIFT
Rank: Novice Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Gestures, prayer, whispered words. Even combat mages cannot afford to spend all their
time learning new Combat Edges and martial skills. For those who enjoy the thrill of melee, or want to improve their companions’ abilities, this spell provides a quick solution to a lack of training.
With a successful arcane skill roll, a single recipient gains the benefi ts of a single Combat Edge, as chosen by the caster. The caster (not the recipient) must meet the usual Rank requirement of the Edge but ignores other requirements, including those requiring other Edges. If the Edge is an Improved version (like Improved Block), the caster suffers a –2 penalty to his arcane skill roll.
For the duration of the spell, the recipient gains all the benefi ts of the Edge. Edges gained through this power provide no additional benefi t if the character already has the Edge.
WATER WALK
Rank: Novice Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Glowing feet, water hardens. Some spellcasters can walk upon the very surface of
the water as if it were solid ground. Lakes, becalmed seas, and other calm waters may be traversed normally. Rough seas count as diffi cult ground as the hero must run up and down waves.
While under the effects of the spell, the caster walks as if in a shallow puddle. He cannot go beneath the surface any more than he can go beneath that of the earth.
WEAKEN UNDEAD
Rank: Veteran Range: Spirit Duration: Maintained Trappings: Chanting, prayers, hymns, symbols of
faith Undead are fearsome beasts, but much of their power
comes from their special abilities. A caster with this spell can strip undead of its link to the necromantic energy fi elds surrounding it, if only for a short while.
The caster makes an opposed arcane skill roll against the Spirit on one target within range. With success, the spell negates the Undead monstrous ability for the du-ration. This doesn’t make the target mortal, just more vulnerable. This power only works on creatures with the Undead monstrous ability
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
WEAPON IMMUNITY
Rank: Seasoned Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Hard skin, shimmering energy fi end, in-
visible shield. While armor provides some protection against all
damage, this spell can negate all damage from a specifi c type of weapon. During the casting, the hero chooses one specifi c type of weapon, such as long swords or battle axes (but not all swords or axes).
With success, the target takes half damage from that type of weapon. On a raise, the target is immune to dam-age from that weapon type. Note that this includes magic weapons of the same type, including those with smite cast on them. It does not work against viper weapon while the weapon is a serpent. Similarly, it does not pro-tect against the trappings of spells that merely simulate weapons, such as a bolt spell with a trapping of “fl ying daggers.”
WHIRLWIND
Rank: Seasoned Range: Smarts Duration: Maintained Trappings: Gestures, spinning motion. By making an arcane skill roll, the wearer creates a
whirlwind. The whirlwind fi lls a Medium Burst Template placed
anywhere within range. Anything coming into contact with it must make a Strength roll or be knocked prone. The target’s Size also modifi es this roll. Thus, dragons are harder to knock over than engros.
If a victim rolls a 1, regardless of Wild die, it is also Shaken. The caster can move the whirlwind up to his Smarts die in inches each round, but doing so is an ac-tion.
If the center of the whirlwind is moved out of the caster’s line of sight, the spell is automatically ended.
WILDERNESS STEP
Rank: Novice Range: Touch Duration: Maintained Trappings: Claws, sharp spikes row on boots, glow-
ing feet. Wilderness step makes travel easier, and is thus popu-
lar with those whose travels take them across diffi cult ter-rain. With a successful arcane skill roll, the caster treats all diffi cult terrain as normal terrain. This includes ice, forests, snow, mountains, steep hills, and other terrain types. It does not remove any other inherent penalties, so a hero wading through a deep coldfi re stream still suf-fers damage as normal.
ZEPHYR
Rank: Novice Range: The ship the caster is on Duration: Maintained Trappings: The hero stands behind the sails, arms
out raised and gently blowing, air elemental billows the sails.
This is the spell casters aligned to the wind are most commonly asked to perform. It gently pushes ships along even in a dead calm, and can also improve top speed in normal winds or during deadly combat.
It can be used to cancel the spell becalm. In combat, zephyr improves a vessel’s current Handling by +1, its Acceleration and Top Speed by 25%. It may be cast mul-tiple times, though base Acceleration and Top Speed may never be more than doubled.
Spellcasters have discovered another use for this spell as well. It is quite adept at dispersing swarms of fl ying pests, such as wasps. A success Shakes the swarm, while a raise disperses them (effectively causing a wound). In a few cases, dispersing a swarm actually results in two swarms.
SPELLS
NEW SPELL SUMMARY TABLE
Power Rank Range Duration Effect Aim N Touch Maintained +2 to ranged weapons, +4 with a raise.
Altered Senses N Touch Maintained Gives target Low Light Vision or Infravision, both with a raise.
Analyze Foe S Sight Instant Gives details of a foe’s Edges, Hindrances, and Spe-cial Abilities.
Animate War Tree H Touch Maintained Animates a tree as a war tree.
Arcane Resistance S Touch Maintained Target gains Arcane Resistance Edge, or Improved version with a raise.
Aura S Touch Maintained Creatures adjacent to the hero suffer 2d6 damage. Banish V Spirit Instant Sends one extraplanar creature back to its native
realm. Battle Song S Special Maintained Creatures in a Medium Burst Template gain the
Berserk Edge; raise increases this to a Large Burst Template.
Becalm N Sight Maintained Halves a ship’s Acceleration and Top Speed; +2 to Boating in storms.
Bladebreaker S Smarts Instant Caster makes an opposed roll against a weapon’s damage die to break it.
Bless/Panic S Spirit Maintained +2 to Guts, +4 with a raise; Panic gives a similar penalty.
Bodyguard N Adjacent Special Causes a bodyguard to appear. Bridge S Smarts Maintained Creates a bridge. Each section covers 2 yards. Champion of the Faith S Self Maintained Target gains the Champion or Holy Warrior Edge. Charismatic Aura N Touch Maintained Target gains +1 Charisma, +2 with a raise. Confusion S Smarts x 2 Maintained Victims must make a Spirit roll opposed by arcane
skill or suffer –2 to all trait rolls, –4 with a raise. Corpse Senses S Smarts x 100 yds Maintained Caster can use his senses through a corpse. Detect/Conceal N Smarts x 2 Maintained Allows the caster to fi nd or hide objects. Disease S Spirit Special Victim must make a Vigor roll opposed by arcane skill
or catch a disease. Elemental Form V Self Maintained Caster gains the Special Abilities of an elemental. Energy Immunity S Touch Maintained Protects against one element or trapping; half dam-
age with success, or total immunity with a raise. Enhance Undead S Smarts Special Gives undead an Edge. Ethereal/Corporeal S Smarts Maintained Makes target ethereal or makes an ethereal target
corporeal. Farsight N Touch Maintained +2 to Notice rolls at close range, can see details up
to 5 miles. Fatigue S 12/24/48 Instant Victims must make a Vigor roll opposed by arcane
skill or suffer Fatigue. Feast N Spirit Instant Creates food for up to 5 people per Rank. Fog Cloud V 1 mi/Rank Maintained Reduces visibility by one step, two with a raise. Fortune’s Favored S Touch Maintained Target may reroll failed benny rolls. Gift of Battle N Touch Maintained Target gains one Leadership Edge or two with a
raise. Glyph V Special Special Stores a single spell for activation when a condition
is met. Gravespeak S Touch Maintained May question a corpse. Greater Zombie H Spirit x 2 Special Creates barrow dwellers and mummies. Growth/Shrink S Smarts x 2 Maintained Changes size of target; see notes. Heat Mask S Touch Maintained Negates infravision. Insight N Touch Instant Caster gets a glimpse into an object or person’s
past. Knockdown S Cone Instant Strength roll or be knocked back 1d4 and prone.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
Leaping N Touch Maintained Targets adds +2” to leaping distance or +4” with a raise.
Lock/Unlock N Touch Special/Instant Makes a lock harder to open, or opens one lock. Luck/Jinx V Touch Maintained Target rolls two trait dice and takes the best (luck)
or worst (jinx). Mend V Touch Instant Repairs 1 wound to a ship, 2 with a raise. Mimic N Smarts Maintained Allows the caster to use one spell used by the target. Mind Rider V Spirit Maintained Can use someone else’s senses. Negate Arcana V Smarts Maintained Automatic dispel cast on power entering or leaving
a template. Nightmare S Smarts x 1 mile Special Victim must make a Spirit roll, rolling on the Fright
Table if he fails. Precognition V Special Instant Caster may rearrange any two initiative cards, four
with a raise. Prolonged Blast V 24/48/96 Maintained Causes 2d6 or 3d6 damage in a Template each
round. Quake V Smarts x 3 Instant Causes an earthquake; see notes. Refuge S Smarts 12 hours Creates a shelter; +2 to Vigor rolls to resist cold
while inside, +4 with raise. Regenerate H Touch Maintained Target may make a free Soak roll for each wound
given him, +2 with a raise. Sacrifi ce V Self Maintained Caster can kill a sentient being to gain a bonus to his
next arcane skill roll. Sanctuary N Special Instant Caster returns to a safe destination. Sentry S Smarts x 2 Special Creates a ghostly sentry or places an alarm on one object. Silence S Touch Maintained Negates all sound within a Medium Template, or
Large Template with a raise. Sluggish Refl exes S Smarts x 2 Maintained Victims must make Spirit roll opposed by arcane skill
or draw one less initiative card. Slumber S Smarts x 2 Maintained Victims fall asleep if they fail a Spirit roll, –2 with a raise. Sphere of Might V Smarts Maintained Creates a movable sphere of force; see notes. Storm S 10 miles Maintained Creatures a storm; see notes. Strength of the Undead V Touch Maintained Caster gains one trait or ability from an undead crea-
ture, two with a raise. Succor N Touch Instant Removes one Fatigue level, two with a raise. Summon Beast V Spirit x 10 yards Maintained Summons a mundane beast. Summon Demon V Smarts x 2 Maintained Summons a demon. Summon Elemental V Special Maintained Summons an elemental. Summon Herald H Spirit Special Summons a deity’s herald. Viper Weapon S Spirit x 2 Maintained Turns a weapon into a venomous snake. Voice on the Wind N Smarts x 50 mi Instant Allows the caster to send a message of 10 words per
caster Rank to a distant target. Wall Walker N Touch Maintained Recipient can walk and run on walls or ceilings. Wandering Senses N Smarts x 10 Maintained Allows the caster to move his senses up to 6” per
round. Warding S Special Maintained Prevents a specifi c type of creature from entering
a Medium Template; raise increases this to a Large Burst Template.
Warrior’s Gift N Touch Maintained Grants the target one Combat Edge. Water Walk N Touch Maintained Target can walk on water as if solid ground. Weaken Undead V Spirit Maintained Negates an undead’s Undead monstrous ability. Weapon Immunity S Touch Maintained Target takes half damage, or no damage with a raise,
from a specifi c weapon type. Whirlwind S Smarts Maintained Covers a Medium Burst Template; anything touch-
ing the template must make a Strength roll or be knocked prone.
Wilderness Step N Touch Maintained Target treats diffi cult ground as normal ground. Zephyr N One ship Maintained Increases ship’s Acceleration and Top Speed by
25%, +1 Handling.
Everything living eventually dies. Even the gods are fated to die one day in the fi nal, climatic struggle be-tween good and evil.
However, while a mortal’s fl esh may rot off the bone, his name can live forever through his deeds. Skalds sing tales of heroes who perished long ago, keeping the memory of these fi gures as alive today as it was when they walked the earth.
Glory has nothing to do with social standing, wealth, or who one calls friend—it is a mark of a character’s reputation as a hero. A king may be well known across the lands, but that does not make him a hero, nor does it entitle him to become the focus of ballads or epic po-ems. Only through heroic deeds can a character aspire to enter the history books and oral myths of Rassilon.
Your hero’s Glory starts at zero, but can be affected by his or her actions during the course of the game. The higher your hero’s Glory, the more renowned he is across Rassilon and the more benefi ts he gains.
Glory can go negative, but this grants no benefi ts—it just puts your character further away from being a hero.
GLORY VS. CHARISMA
While Charisma is generally based on appearance and personality, it can also be modifi ed by Glory. Goodly folk are more likely to take notice of a famous person, regardless of his physical appearance or manners, and help him when they can, whereas a hero’s foes tremble at his name.
GLORY VS. RANK
A hero’s Rank is a measure of his experience, al-though it does incorporate a degree of glory. Rank is a by-product of earning Experience Points, which aren’t always linked to heroic deeds. Sure, the hero may rescue a princess, but the rescue might be fairly mundane and quickly forgotten. Only deeds which attract attention count toward Glory.
GAINING GLORY
Glory is measured with Glory Points, in exactly the same way experience is measured with Experience Points. Characters can rise to become famous heroes or else they can slip into mediocrity.
While some roleplaying games reward infamous deeds, Hellfrost does not. All being a villain does is move you further away from the benefi ts to be gained by he-roic characters.
Glory should not be dolled out like candy. It should be earned through heroic endeavors, good roleplaying, and investing heavily in the character, not expected just because the hero is a player character.
VARIABLE GLORIOUS DEEDS
After each adventure, and only when the heroes re-
turn to civilization, one of the party may begin telling the tale of their epic battles and heroic deeds. The character makes a Persuasion roll, modifi ed as below.
The GM is always free to add positive modifi ers for truly heroic actions or based on the character’s weak-nesses and how he overcame them. Always try to think of how the heroes’ true exploits (as opposed to any extra bits they invent) sound as a tale told by skalds. This is important, as it is the listeners on Rassilon who are ef-fectively granting them Glory.
Ideally, an extra +1 or +2 should be the maximum. For instance, slaying a dread liche is certainly worthy of praise, but that is already covered in the table. However, lopping off his head with a Called Shot as the killing blow is worth a small modifi er, as it’s the sort of detail found in epic poems.
Likewise, a Novice party with a d6 as their highest combat skill (including arcane skills) who slay a bunch of orc warriors in melee without any assistance should be rewarded with a greater chance of fame.
GLORY
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
The GM may also opt to add penalties to refl ect weak-er opponents (such as unarmed or unarmored orcs) or favorable character circumstances (every hero had a dozen alchemical blast devices on hand).
GLORIOUS DEEDS TABLE
Reason Mod Storyteller Is a skald +1 Has negative Glory –2 Highest Character Rank Seasoned –1 Veteran –2 Heroic –4 Legendary –6 Highest Number of Foes You outnumbered them –1 They outnumbered you more than 2 to 1 +1 They outnumbered you more than 4 to 1 +2 They outnumbered you more than 10 to 1 +4 Highest Foes’ Toughness 4 or less –1 5 to 6 +0 7 to 10 +1 11 to 15 +2 16 to 20 +4 21 or more +6 Wild Cards Per Wild Card +1 Per named Wild Card +2 Per Wild Card killed in a single blow +4 Arcane Background A foe had an AB with 5 or less powers +1 A foe had an AB with 6 to 10 powers +2 A foe had an AB with 11+ powers +4
Arcane Background: Where multiple foes with an Arcane Background were defeated, only the highest bo-nus applies.
Character Rank: The higher the heroes’ Rank, the more dangerous foes they must overcome before anyone is interested in their tales. After all, when you’ve already slain a giant, who cares if you killed an orc chieftain?
Foes’ Toughness: Once you start talking about fi ght-ing a giant, listeners tend to forget or lose interest in the orcs you defeated in an earlier encounter. As such, only the highest Toughness of defeated foes counts.
Named Wild Card: No one really cares much if a hero slays a generic orc chieftain, but the slaying of Nargal the Terrible is a notable deed. Not every Wild Card should, or indeed can, be named. Sometimes a Wild Card orc chief is just a nameless foe.
Number of Foes: As with foes’ Toughness, once you begin telling how the party slew a dozen orcs in one en-counter, talk of beating fi ve or six tends to become dull to the average listener. As such, only record the greatest number of foes slain in a single encounter. Defeating three orcs in one room and eight in another equates to only eight orcs.
The party size includes any allies on the heroes’ side—a party with 20 members must defeat a lot of foes at once to get noticed. Even if the heroes forget to men-tion their helpers, any survivors will be telling their own stories across Rassilon.
Single Blow: A Wild Card killed in a single blow must have been unwounded when the killing blow was deliv-ered. Chopping the head off a dread liche with 3 wounds is not exactly heroic.
Likewise, the foe must have been aware of the party and capable of retaliation—slaughtering sleeping dragons or entangled giants doesn’t make a good story, though the entangle spell might be worth a small bonus.
Storyteller: Although anyone can tell a story, skalds are trained in using the right words and adjusting the rhythm to keep an audience enthralled. They can turn even a mundane adventure into an epic struggle.
GLORY AWARDS
With a success, every hero involved in the action gains 1d6 Glory. A raise increases this to 2d6. Failure earns no bonus or penalty. A critical failure, however, causes the loss of 1d6 Glory, perhaps because the listeners disbe-lieved the storyteller or doubt the prowess of the party to achieve what they claim. Roll the dice for each individual member of the party earning or losing Glory.
Glory awards can be altered by the GM, but this should be done only for truly notable actions. Modifi ers normally apply solely to individual members of the party, not every member.
For instance, the hero who delivered the Called Shot to the head, killing the dread liche, should earn a +1 or +2 bonus for his notable deed. This actively encourages use of special maneuvers and imaginative combat, as op-posed to the standard “attack–damage” routine.
Of course, if one hero played little part in the action, perhaps because he was Incapacitated early on or spent the whole time cowering in fear, he should receive less Glory than those who were in the thick of the action. Just because he’s a player character and was present does not entitle him to the same reward as those who risked their lives and took part in the bulk of the action.
Such a hero may roll his dice with a –3 penalty, for example, possibly earning a small penalty overall with an unlucky roll because of his inaction.
FIXED GLORY AWARDS
Fixed Glory awards cover lesser deeds not played out
(such as events during long periods of downtime), kill-ing smaller number of foes during an adventure (they do slowly add up over time), or rewards for which there are many witnesses (battles or rescues). These are in addi-tion to any Glory gained above.
GM’s are encouraged to devise their own modifi ers for things like concluding peace treaties or founding new mercantile routes that benefi t a large population. Although notable deeds, the rewards for these types of
GLORY
endeavor should not be overly high—few people will remember who signed a peace treaty, but you can bet they’ll recall a hero who risked his life to venture into the heavily guarded camp of the enemy commander and kill him in an epic duel.
ACHIEVE RANK
Even without performing major heroic deeds, a hero can become famous through his collective lesser deeds. Such rewards are typical of the examples above, espe-cially the slaying of lesser foes.
These are wrapped into a single +5 Glory bonus gained when a hero achieves a new Rank. It is possible, though rare, for a hero to reach Legendary status with no additional Glory—he has performed many deeds, but none stand out as truly heroic.
MASS BATTLE
War is a terrible thing and something sane men avoid, but it can also grow and break reputations.
Use the table below whenever the characters are in-volved in a fi ght using the Mass Battle rules. Whereas skirmishes are commonplace, true mass battles remain rare events. Hence, all Glory modifi ers are fi xed.
MASS BATTLE GLORY TABLE
Reason Mod Size Smallest army had hundreds of troops +1 Smallest army had thousands of troops +3 Smallest army had more than 10,000 troops +5 Enemy Orc/goblin army +/–1 Undead army +/–2 Hellfrost army +/–3 Victory Enemy had less tokens or was equal +1 For each token the enemy had above yours +2 Defeat Enemy had more tokens or was equal –1 For each token less your enemy had –3 Personal Heroics Two raises on Heroes in Mass Battles roll +1 Commander You commanded the army x2
Character Roll: Scoring a double raise is more than just a die result. It represents a major event within a battle, such as slaying an enemy commander or slaugh-tering so many foes a battalion breaks.
However, the modifi er only applies if the number of enemy tokens was less than or equal to your army’s tokens at the time (slaying an enemy commander when you have a +3 bonus is nowhere near as heroic as when you have a –3 penalty.
Commander: A hero who commands an army gains
greater Glory than his troops for victory, but also suffers more ignominy if he loses the fi eld. Take the fi nal Glory modifi er and double it to see what the hero earned.
Defeat: Defeat is never easy to live with, but the ig-nominy is far worse if you outnumbered your foe. For each token you outnumbered your enemy at the start of a battle you suffer a –3 penalty.
Enemy Forces: Certain races are more despised than others. To qualify for the bonus, the specifi c enemy must account for more than 75% of the enemy army’s troop strength. A Hellfrost army, a truly rare event, must be one known to have originated in the Hellfrost. Typically the bulk of such hordes are orcs, but in this case their origin outweighs the racial makeup.
Add the modifi er if the heroes won, and subtract it if they lost (a defeat by a hated foe usually means the enemy will grow more confi dent and thus pose a greater danger in the future).
Size: Huge armies are rare in Rassilon, and thus while any battle earns Glory, the more participants there are the greater the tale told.
Victory: Everybody loves a winner. The greater the size of the enemy army, the more reward is earned. For each token your enemy’s army was larger than yours when battle commenced, the hero earns a +2 Glory bonus.
RESCUE
Even if the heroes’ tale of how they killed a hundred orcs doesn’t earn them any immediate Glory, having prisoners recount the tale of their rescue quickly causes word to spread.
Important NPCs must be famous, powerful, and named. A merchant, wizard, priest, minor noble, or similar is worth +1 Glory. Saving a count or a skilled spellcaster is worth +3. Rescuing a prince, king, or truly powerful spellcaster gains the hero +5 Glory.
For groups of lesser NPCs, rescuing ten or so is worth +1 Glory, a few tens +2, and a hundred or more +3. Saving a lone villager from an orc tribe is brave, but not enough to be retold by skalds.
PLAYING A VILLAIN
Not every player is going to want to play a hero, and that’s fi ne. After all, we’ve given the stat blocks for several evil deities, and there’s no restriction on characters worshipping them. However, there is a price to pay for villainy. Heroes who perform heroic deeds earn bonuses through their elevated Glory—villains get very little reward for being evil. Of course, to earn Glory a hero has to take great risks and maintain a certain code of conduct, whereas a villain doesn’t have that restriction. As such, villains are easy to play, but heroes get all the rewards for being “forced” to act in a certain manner.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
Rescue doesn’t have to mean entering a prison and breaking captives out. Liberating a village beset by frost-reavers, for instance, counts as a rescue. If the rescue involves a Mass Battle rather than tabletop action, the party is deserving of the Mass Battle rewards as well.
GLORY BENEFITS
Being a hero has its perks. When a hero reaches a multiple of 20 Glory he must immediately pick one ben-efi t from the list below, meeting any requirements.
Some heroes may opt to acquire Followers or become leaders of men and build a personal army. Others might use their fame to gain valuable connections or become better combatants, while others may prefer to rely on their reputation to ensure a friendly welcome in civilized lands.
Unless otherwise stated, benefi ts can be taken mul-tiple times—the number in parentheses after the name
indicates the maximum number of times the benefi t may be taken. Fill in the appropriate section of the character sheet.
Should Glory drop below a multiple of 20, any benefi ts above the character’s current Glory level are temporar-ily lost (unless otherwise stated) until Glory is regained. Dropping below 20 and then rising above it again does not grant the opportunity to take a new benefi t—it sim-ply allows the “lost” one to be used again.
Example: Dave’s character, Barak the Fair, has the Heroic Status benefi t, which he took he reached 20 Glory. When he reaches 40 Glory he takes the Connec-tion Edge ( Hearth Knights).
Due to a “misunderstanding” regarding a visit to noble’s daughter’s bedchamber late one night, he suffers a 2-point Glory penalty, lowering his total to 38. The Hearth Knights immediately suspend ties to the hero, but Barak retains his Heroic Status. Only if Barak’s Glory drops below 20, will he lose his Heroic Status as well.
Later on, Barak earns +4 Glory, bringing his total
GLORY
to 42. The Hearth Knights open relations again now the hero’s reputation is not as sullied—Barak does not get to pick a new benefi t.
DEATH & HONOR (AUTOMATIC)
When a character dies, his replacement normally be-gins with half his Experience Points. However, high or low Glory at the time of the character’s death can alter this amount.
When a character dies with below 99 Glory, the char-acter has 50% Experience as standard. Between 100 and 199 Glory, the replacement has 75% Experience, and at 200 and over he retains the full Experience Points 9of his predecessor.
COMBAT PROWESS (2)
Requirements: 40+ Glory While most stories about heroes start of close to
the truth, they quickly spiral out of control, attributing heroes with abilities far in excess of what they actually possessed.
The character may take a Combat Edge immediately. He must meet all the requirements as normal.
CONNECTION (4)
Requirements: 20+ Glory At some point a hero is likely to gain Glory by aiding
certain organizations, whether directly or indirectly. When a hero gains a Connection, he must pick a
specifi c group, as per the Edge of the same name. The hero does not belong to the organization—he simply has friends among their number willing to assist him (though he may, at the GM’s discretion, be offered membership as well).
The Connection should be appropriate to the character’s background and his deeds. For instance, a hero who slays many Hellfrost beasts likely attracts the attention of the Hearth Knights, whereas one who stops an outbreak of disease caused by a plague demon might fi nd the church of Eira or Sisters of Mercy are favorable toward him.
Note that the hero still needs Persuasion and Street-wise for this benefi t to be of any use. Just because he’s renowned, it doesn’t mean the Connection will drop everything and come to his aid with exactly what he wants.
FAVORED (2)
Requirements: 60+ Glory The adage that there are old heroes and bold heroes,
but no old, bold heroes doesn’t apply to this character. Whether because he believes in his own legend and
refuses to get up when the going gets tough, or whether the gods are smiling on him, the hero can do things other heroes can’t.
He gains a free benny. This adds to his regular total, thus increasing the number he starts each session with.
FOLLOWERS (10)
Requirements: 40+ Glory Famous heroes attract entourages and hangers-on. The
hero gains the Followers Edge regardless of his character Rank. The GM and player should work together to deter-mine the nature of the Followers, based on the character’s profession and deeds (see p. 100 for details).
Followers are not automatically replaced when they die. Additional Followers may be gained at Legendary as normal through taking the Followers Edge with advances or by earning more Glory and taking this benefi t.
Followers don’t automatically leave if a character’s Glory drops below the level he gained this benefi t, but they begin to grumble, refuse orders, and eventually mutiny. In game terms, the character’s Leadership Edges no longer work on them. When his Glory rises above the threshold again, his Followers stop grumbling.
As noted previously in this chapter, having Extras ac-company you on every mission means you have to slay more foes to earn Glory.
HEROIC AURA (4)
Requirements: 40+ Glory True heroes have destinies beyond those of lesser
men. As a hero becomes more famous, so his fate be-comes more important. Lesser foes no longer present the danger they once did, and only the mightiest enemies give the hero pause.
When not wearing armor (he may use a shield), he gains +1 Toughness each time he takes this benefi t. While wearing armor, no benefi t is gained. Encumbrance plays no part in this benefi t—the modifi er is gained even if the hero is heavily weighed down with other gear.
In game terms, taking this benefi t once grants the protection equivalent of leather armor, but it cannot be reduced by AP weapons, protects against area effect at-tacks, and has zero encumbrance. With a second benefi t, the hero as well protected as wearing chain mail, three times plate, a fourth time gives him better protection than any mundane armor.
HEROIC STATUS (4)
Requirements: 20+ Glory This bonus represents how well known the hero is
across Rassilon. With heroes few and far between in the modern era, those who stand out from the crowd are widely recognized for their notable deeds.
Common folk recognize the hero for his brave deeds and are likely to help him in his endeavors, if only for the bragging rights.
He gains a +1 bonus to initial rolls on the Reaction Table when dealing with civilized races with whom he has a generally positive reputation, and to Persuasion
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
and Streetwise rolls each time he receives this perk, to a maximum of +4. This stacks with bonuses from any Professional Edges and with the hero’s Charisma.
A hero also gains the same bonus to Intimidation rolls—enemies quake at his name and even allies are fearful of the character’s prowess.
IMMORTALIZED IN SONG (1)
Requirements: Heroic Status taken 4 times Whether a brave warrior, a noble lord, or a powerful
spellcaster, the character’s place in history is assured for eternity. Songs are sung and poems told about his leg-endary deeds, parents name their children after the hero, and he is welcomed at any goodly settlement. When he eventually dies, he is guaranteed a burial befi tting the greatest of heroes.
The number of Followers the hero currently has doubles, as men fl ock to bask in his glory (this cannot be applied to Followers gained later). He may also take another Novice Sidekick immediately.
LEADER OF MEN (4)
Requirements: 40+ Glory Not every hero wants to be a leader of men, but those
who do quickly fi nd others respond well to them in times of stress, like a battle.
The character may take a Leadership Edge immedi-ately. He must meet all the requirements of the Edge as normal. As he gains no Experience Points from this benefi t, his current character Rank applies.
SIDEKICK (1)
Requirements: 80+ Glory Regardless of his character Rank, the hero has at-
tracted a Sidekick, as per the Edge (see p. 25 for details). If the Sidekick dies, the character may take this benefi t again when he earns more Glory. A second Sidekick may be gained at Legendary as normal through taking the Sidekick Edge with an advance.
Like Followers, Sidekicks remain with the hero when his Glory drops, but may grumble, not perform to the best of their abilities, or even refuse to follow orders. When the Glory rises suffi ciently high again, the Sidekick returns to his former loyal state.
LOSING GLORY
Glory can be won, bit can also be lost. In general, a hero must deliberately act in a less than heroic way to suffer a Glory penalty. Everyone makes mistakes and crosses the line at some point, but minor misdemeanors should be ignored unless the character makes a habit of such actions.
Sample penalties are included below.
Glory Event Special Slaying a good and just powerful NPC –1 to –20 Caught committing a crime –3 Cowardice or leaving a comrade behind –3 Refusing Orders (the Hindrance) –10 Breaking an oath
Crime: This is a catchall penalty covering anything considered abhorrent to civilized society. Theft may war-rant a small penalty, as may a single murder. However, arson, rape, and mass murder all deserve high-end pen-alties.
Oaths: A creature’s word is a solemn bond among the civilized races, and those who renege on sworn oaths are considered treacherous.
Slaying: Killing a good, just, and powerful NPC, such as a king or an arkhwisard on the Council of Four, causes a hero to suffer a drastic loss of Glory.
His Glory is swapped from a positive to a negative immediately. For instance, a hero with +50 Glory drops to –50 and becomes a very wanted man.
The greater the hero’s reputation, the higher he falls for such a terrible and wicked act.
NEGATIVE GLORY
Heroes with negative Glory do not earn rewards, but
they do garner drawbacks.
WANTED
When a hero reaches –20 Glory, he gains the Wanted (Minor) Hindrance. At –40, this changes to the Major version.
Generally, the Minor Hindrance extends to a single realm, usually the one where the Glory penalty was incurred. The Major version, on the other hand, covers pretty much all the civilized, settled domains of Rassilon. A hero who gains enough Glory to rise above the rat-ing at which he gained this Hindrance, doesn’t lose the Hindrance. He may have performed some heroic deeds, but he is still a wanted man.
ENEMY
At –10 Glory, the hero acquires the Enemy (Minor) Hindrance. At –30 (or lower), the Enemy becomes a Ma-jor Hindrance.
The exact nature of the enemy depends on the villain’s deeds. A servant of Thrym may fi nd a Hearth Knight has vowed to hunt him down. A cleric of Vali may make an enemy of a paladin of Eira. A king slayer may fi nd a cleric of Hothar hounding his trail after justice.
Again, it doesn’t matter if the hero’s Glory rises above the level at which he gained his foe—his Enemy doesn’t give up his vendetta.
Should the hero gain a Major Enemy while his Minor Enemy is still at large, the foe simply steps up his cam-paign against the character. Otherwise, the hero gains a new enemy.
The continent of Rassilon did not always appear as it does today. Once, the frozen realm lay far to the north, a distant region known to most folk only in myth.
When the Blizzard War began, everything changed. Ancient empires were wiped off the face of the planet and countless souls were killed. Even the mighty Anari, whose empire dominated southern Rassilon, suffered terribly.
Those who survived had to contend with decades of disease, famine, and war before civilization reestablished itself. Even then, cities remained isolated from each other, unwilling to lend aid for fear of reducing their own resources or leaving themselves open to assault. Bandits roamed freely in the wilds, and warlords carved out small domains. Then the long winters began.
The lands below the Icebarrier were, until recently, fairly stable. In recent decades, though, the winters have grown harsher, the lands above the Icebarrier are rapidly being lost to the snow and ice, and the Hellfrost fi ends are growing stronger and more confi dent.
Refugees are fl ooding through Hellfrost Pass. The ever-growing burden of refugees is leading to famine and, the shantytowns they construct cause outbreaks of disease in the Hearthlands. Bandits and outlaws plague the roads, neighbors are beginning to close their doors to each other again, hoarding what little they have, and tensions over agricultural land and who should take in refugees are threatening to spill over into bloodshed.
To those who remember the dark tales of what life was like after the Blizzard War, it seems history is repeat-ing itself.
CALENDAR
Rassilon has thirteen months and four seasons, though snow lies on the ground all year round. All terms used here are the Trader names, the standard among all the civilized races.
MONTHS
The thirteen months are based on a lunar calendar, and are detailed below.
Snaermonan (Snowmoon): The start of the new year is a time of heavy snow, even in the Hearthlands. Flurries that started in Wulfmonan become more constant, blan-keting the ground. Further north, in the Winterlands, Snaermonan marks the start of months of heavy snow.
Frostmonan (Frostmoon): In the Hearthlands, the snows decrease during Frostmonan, replaced by hard frosts. With the ground frozen hard, travel actually be-comes easier, though travelers must still contend with freezing wind and sleet. The Winterlands remain blan-keted by snow.
Eostremonan ( Eostre’s Moon): Traditionally, Eo-stremonan marks the end of winter. In days of yore, spring began on the day the fi rst sacred sheep in the high temple in the Imperial City (now ruined) gave birth. These days, each temple maintains its own fl ock, and so different domains celebrate spring at different times. The Winterlands remain snow-covered, the sheep there not lambing until later in the year.
Plohmonan (Plowmoon): With the frosts over and warmer rain falling, farmers in the Hearthlands begin plowing the soil, ready for planting. The fi rst markets of the year are held at this time. Spring comes to the Low Winterlands in this month, though further north the snows are only just beginning to lessen.
Sowanmonan (Sowingmoon): The traditional month for planting crops and moving cattle to the high pastures, Sowanmonan is a busy month for the farmers. Trade increases as the temperatures continue to climb. In the Low Winterlands, farmers both plow and sow in the same month, having smaller fi elds and less opportu-nity to delay their duties. Toward the Icewall, the snows lessen, and the fi rst hint of spring enters the air.
Werremonan (Warmoon): Werremonan remains the favorite time to war on one's enemies. The fi elds are planted, allowing the nobles to gather their militias to
LIFE IN RASSILON
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
their banner. In less warlike domains, Werremonan is the time of the great markets and a dramatic increase in trade. The High Winterlands now enjoy their fi rst days of spring. In the frozen wastes, war must wait while the farmers await newborn lambs, kids, and calves.
Sceranmonan (Shearingmoon): As one might deduce, Sceranmonan is when the sheep are sheared of their heavy fl eeces. Wool is vital for winter clothing across Rassilon.
Hegmonan (Haymoon): Grain crops are harvested during this month, the heads being stored for next year's seeds or ground to make fl our. The stalks are left to dry in the warm sun to make animal feed for the winter. To-ward the Hellfrost, it is time to gather supplies for the rapidly approaching winter.
Haerfestmonan (Harvestmoon): Other crops, in-cluding wild fruit and berries, are gathered at this time and prepared for storage. The fi elds are a hive of activity, as farmers work quickly to gather their crops before the heavy autumnal rains begin. The High Winterlands are already suffering the fi rst snowfalls of the impending winter.
Falmonan (Fallmoon): For agricultural workers, Fal-monan means working in the barns and silos, preparing the harvested goods, which must last for many months, and securing the livestock, which are brought down from the summer pastures. The last great markets of the year are held. The days begin to shorten, and the Low Winter-lands might, on a bad day, see snowfall. In the far north, winter now begins, with light fl urries quickly developing into constant snowfall.
Huntianmonan (Huntmoon): Hearthlanders and their neighbors in the Low Winterlands take this time to gather game and cull their herds. Meat is salted or smoked, then placed in secure storage, away from the teeth and claws of wolves and bears. Snowfall in the Low Winterlands begins to get heavier, while the High Winter-lands are already swathed in endless white.
Fogmonan (Fogmoon): As the heat of summer leeches away into the biting cold of winter, the Hearth-lands suffer from dense fogs, which can cover the land for weeks. As one heads north, the fogs lessen, the snows increase, and the temperatures rapidly plummet.
Wulfmonan (Wolfmoon): So named because wolves and bandits prowl closer to settlements, searching for easy prey to fi ll their hungry bellies. Winter has come to the Hearthlands, and the ground begins to harden. Snow fl urries begin, though they rarely amount to much. The Winterlands are now locked in hard winter, and commu-nities, isolated from each other, must rely on their own reserves to survive the cold, dark nights.
DAYS & WEEKS
Each month is broken down into four weeks of eight days. The weeks aren’t given names, but the days are. These are known as Heafoddaeg (Headday), Waesc-daeg (Washday), Marketdaeg (Marketday), Monandaeg (Moonday), Sunnandaeg (Sunday), Healfdaeg (Halfday), Milcdaeg (Milkday), and Endedaeg (Endday).
The last two days of each month are holidays, and are renamed as Raestdaeg (Restday) and Sangdaeg (Songday). They are the only days during the month not spent work-ing for most folks. Most settlements have one or two extra festivals per month, which are excuses not to work.
CALENDAR NOTATION
To give a specifi c date, citizens refer to the week num-ber of the day in question and the season. Thus, a date might be given as second Sunnandaeg of Plohmonan, the fourth Marketdaeg of Falmonan, and so on.
A year in Rassilon is 416 days long. Years are numbered since the Ice Rise, which marked the end of the Blizzard War, and carry the suffi x “IR.” The current year is 499 IR. Although dwarves and elves retain their own calendars,
SEASONS
Month Hearthlands Low Winterlands High Winterlands Snaermonan Winter Winter Winter Frostmonan Winter Winter Winter Eostremonan Winter/Spring Winter Winter Plohmonan Spring Winter/Spring Winter Sowanmonan Spring Spring Winter/Spring Werremonan Spring Spring Spring Sceranmonan Summer Summer Summer Hegmonan Summer Summer Fall Haerfestmonan Summer Fall Winter Falmonan Fall Fall Winter Huntianmonan Fall Winter Winter Fogmonan Fall Winter Winter Wulfmonan Winter Winter Winter Winter/Spring: This is when Eostre begins to gain dominance over the winter. Typically, the fi rst two weeks of the month are wintry, the latter months more mild. Heah Sumor Daeg (High Summer Day): Falls on the fi rst Sunnandaeg of Sceranmonan. Heah Wyntr Daeg (High Winter Day): Falls on the third Sunnandaeg of Wulfmonan.
LIFE IN RASSILON
all understand, and commonly use, the human method of tracking time, if only to avoid confusion. Years before the Blizzard War are simply noted by a negative number (such as -213).
TIMEKEEPING
There are no mechanical clocks in Rassilon. Even water clocks are found only in rich nobles’ demesnes. Most commoners tell the time with candles or, if they have money, sandglasses (an “hourglass” which runs for three hours).
The 24-hour day is broken down into eight time slots known as gaets (“gates”), each corresponding to what we would call three hours. The name comes from the ancient belief that the sun passes through a series of celestial gates during its daily cycle. Gaets are simply named as First Gaet, Second Gaet and so on. First Gaet always begins at dawn, and thus as the seasons change and the length of the day grows and shrinks, the exact time of First Gaet moves accordingly.
No race regularly bothers to track shorter time peri-ods, though mages use sandglasses calibrated in periods as low as one-tenth of a gaet for measuring alchemical processes.
SUN & MOON
As there is one sun in the sky, so there is one moon. The sun is known as Sigel’s Hearth, because it warms the land as a hearth fi re does a home (though this is less true today). The moon is known as Maera’s Ember because of its pale, cold light. Skalds, ever poetic, refer to it as Niht’s Bane, because it breaks the darkness of night.
As in our own world, Rassilon's sun changes position and the time it rises and sets as the year waxes and wanes. The moon, however, keeps to a regular 12-hour cycle and is unaffected by seasonal changes. At the equinoxes, the sun rises exactly as the moon sets. This also means that in summer, the sun and moon are often in the sky at the same time, whereas in winter, the moon rises before the sun peaks over the horizon.
The phases of the moon change with precision over the course of a month, and thus Rassilon’s calendar is lunar. The fi rst day of Weaxansicol (“waxing sickle,” the quarter moon) always falls on the fi rst Heafoddaeg of a month, and lasts for four days.
Every four days thereafter, the moon goes through another phase until, at the start of the next month, it reaches the fi rst day of Deorcmonan again. The other phases of the moon are Weaxanhealf (“waxing half ”), Weaxangibbus (“waxing gibbous”), Fulmonan (“full moon”), Waniangibbus, (“waning gibbous”), Wanian-healf (“waning half ”), Waniansicol (“waning sickle”), and Deorcmonan (“dark moon,” or the new moon).
No phase of the moon is considered particularly aus-picious or ominous by the citizens of Rassilon. There are no lycanthropes to haunt the nights of the full moon, and while Deorcmonan is associated with the goddess
Niht, patron of thieves and murderers, the creatures which haunt the dark are no more dangerous than those abroad on other nights. The true danger of Deorcmonan is it’s harder to spot them!
DAILY LIFE
The vast majority of Rassilon’s inhabitants are work-ers, be they farmers, crafters, or city guards. Above them are the middle class merchants, master crafters, and common priests,and mages. At the top of the ladder, and in a tiny minority, are the nobles, merchant princes, high priests, the arkhwisards (or their equivalent), and so on.
Agricultural workers usually work in the fi elds during daylight hours, which means very long days in the sum-mer. In the winter, they tend to their livestock and repair their houses, being unable to work in the frozen fi elds.
Crafters work a 10-hour day regardless of season, us-ing candles or lanterns in the dark winter days.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
Merchants work as needed. Some run their own busi-nesses, meaning they have to be at work as long as there are customers. Others own ships or caravans, and are continually on the road, so to speak.
The lucky few, the so-called merchant princes, sit at the top of a chain of stores or caravans and reap the profi ts of their hirelings’ work. Their work is limited to paperwork rather than the actual hands on running of the business.
Nobles rarely work. They spend their time managing their estates (which usually means giving orders to hire-lings), hunting, socializing, plotting, and so on.
DIET
Diets across Rassilon are pretty similar, though those
of higher social status have a few luxuries and larger por-tions than the masses.
Meat, which provides vital protein and fat, is served with every meal, even breakfast (though these are usu-ally cold cuts). Hunters kill rabbit, deer, wild boar, birds, and aurochs for their meat. Meat is usually smoked or salted to help preserve it. Folk near the coast or the ma-jor rivers eat fresh fi sh, shellfi sh, and even whale. Those further away dine on smoked, pickled, or salted fi sh.
Most fruits are now impossible to grow, though many varieties of wild berries and nuts can be found in most larders. In the Hearthlands it is possible to grow hardy root vegetables, such as carrots, potatoes, and turnips, and leaf vegetables like cabbage or sprouts (also known as “fey cabbages”), but the crop sizes are small and the produce far from plump.
Wheat is grown, where possible, for bread, and barley for porridge and beer. Milk is commonly drunk with breakfast, and most rural families keep goats for this purpose (cows being more expensive to purchase and raise). Nobles often drink mead, though bees aren’t anywhere near as productive as they once were, even in the Hearthlands. The honey is also used as a sweetener in food.
EDUCATION
Only in the cities and largest towns does structured
schooling exist in the form of colleges and universities.
Membership is expensive, which means that only the offspring of the wealthy can afford to attend.
For the average person, schooling is more practi-cal, generally learning their parent’s trade by watching then helping, and picking up knowledge from tales told around the hearths at night. Clerics sometimes take in young children and educate them in the ways of the wider world, but this service is not free, and the poorest members of society lose out.
In rural areas, wealthy merchants and nobles hire pri-vate tutors to educate their children in history, politics, heraldry, literacy, and manners, not to mention sword-play and religion.
For the majority of the population, adult life means working in the fi elds. Although they learn about the sea-sons and other agricultural matters, peasants are gener-ally ignorant of many facts. The goal of most families is to have their child apprenticed to a crafter, which means they will learn a useful trade, or to join the priesthood.
Children blessed with magical talent are quickly advertised in the hopes a mage will take them as an ap-prentice. While mages may not be the wealthiest of pro-fessionals, they can rise to positions of temporal power (and it doesn’t hurt one’s social standing to boast of a mage in the family).
MARRIAGE
Marriages in Rassilon may be for love or for political
purposes. Although the latter is typically reserved for the higher classes, even the peasants have their own pecking order. Under law, humans are adults on their 16th birth-day (or the equivalent for nonhumans) and may marry any time after this. Most humans marry before they are 18, and anyone unmarried by their early twenties is re-garded as rather strange.
Any cleric of any faith may conduct a marriage cer-emony. Usually it depends on the faith of the couple, and it is not unusual to have two priests involved when the bride and groom have a different patron deity. The na-ture of marriage ceremonies changes based on the god or gods involved, and the exact type of marriage.
Traditionally, the father of the bride must supply a dowry. The exact value varies by social class, and can be anywhere from ten, up to many tens of thousands of
LUNAR PHASES BY DAY
Day Week 1 Week 2 Week 3 Week 4 Heafoddaeg Weaxansicol Weaxangibbus Waniangibbus Waniansicol Waescdaeg Weaxansicol Weaxangibbus Waniangibbus Waniansicol Marketdaeg Weaxansicol Weaxangibbus Waniangibbus Waniansicol Monandaeg Weaxansicol Weaxangibbus Waniangibbus Waniansicol Sunnandaeg Weaxanhealf Fulmonan Wanianhealf Deorcmonan Healfdaeg Weaxanhealf Fulmonan Wanianhealf Deorcmonan Milcdaeg Weaxanhealf Fulmonan Wanianhealf Deorcmonan Endedaeg Weaxanhealf Fulmonan Wanianhealf Deorcmonan
LIFE IN RASSILON
gold scields. A dowry rarely consists of hard currency, but instead takes the form of gifts, livestock, or land. Under the ancient laws, unless the woman has a higher social class than the man, she leaves her own family and legally becomes part of the groom’s.
Both the Saxa and Anari now recognize several types of marriage. This wasn’t always the case, but the gradual merging of cultural ideas has produced a common list acceptable to all parties. Love does not factor into these types of marriage—the couple simply decides which type of marriage is best for them.
Note that all the civilized cultures take a dim view of those who cohabit without making some sort of mar-riage commitment. Once a marriage vow is made, it is considered bound by the gods, and adultery is severely punished, usually by outlawing both parties.
Year Marriage: The wedding is valid for 13 months. After this time, the couple may renew their vows or part. Any dowry must be returned in full (in value, not the exact goods) to the bride. Many couples that marry for love choose this marriage fi rst, as it allows them to get to know each other before making any lengthy commit-ment.
Three year, fi ve year and ten year marriages are also known. Couples of all social classes opt for these mar-riages for different reasons, but usually they are a con-venient way of making sure both sides have a “get out” clause from a bad union.
Should a union end, custody of any children typically goes to the father unless the couple have made differ-ent legal arrangements. Either party may contest this. The local noble usually handles such cases, unless he is involved, when it moves one step up the noble social ladder.
Bed Marriage: Similar to the year marriage, except the woman (or sometimes the man) is there just to have children. Under law, any children belong to the party with the higher social class. No dowries are exchanged. This is also known as consortship, and is more common among the nobility than the peasantry.
Life Bond: A life bond is just that—a union for life. Divorce is not possible, though if one party dies, the marriage is annulled in the eyes of the law and the gods. This type of marriage is extremely rare among humans, but popular with dwarves, elves, and engros.
FESTIVALS
Folk in Rassilon work hard. To help break up the
months, and to give people something to look forward to, most settlements hold one or two small festivals a month, typically combining religious and civil functions. The exact nature of the festivals varies from place to place and from race to race.
In Drakeport, for instance, the citizens celebrate Baron Draconov’s birthday, as well as the birthday of his wife and children. Shops are closed, and citizens are encouraged to hold parties.
Most rural communities celebrate festivals based on
the agricultural calendar. The day after sowing fi nishes, the day before plowing or after gathering the harvest, and such like, are religious holidays dedicated to Eostre.
Elves celebrate the turning of the seasons, dwarves hold festivals to mark the death days of important ances-tors, and engros are prone to hold a festival for the least likely reasons. “Finding” a horse warrants a festival, as does starting a journey or ending one, for instance.
Virtually every community celebrates the start of sum-mer with a festival commonly known as Scrapsdaeg, so named because the participants are often reduced to eating the scraps of their winter stores.
JUSTICE
All settlements have a judicial system, though the ex-
act nature of how it works differs. In most Anari lands, the courts are typically civil institutions run by the clergy of Hothar. Among the Finnar and Saxa and within the Magocracy, nobles have the power to pass judgment on those of lower social status, though they often confer with priests of Hothar to ensure they are acting in ac-cordance with the ancient laws.
Theft is seen as a serious crime and ranks higher than murder in many lands. Cynics claim that whereas an act of theft removes food from someone’s mouth, commit-ting murder just means there is more to go round.
Other crimes include arson, rape, giving false mea-sure, oath breaking (usually only among dwarves, Finnar, and Saxa), assault, perjury, treason, and so on. On top of these are religious crimes, known as “sins,” which are handled by each specifi c faith.
Punishments vary by race and settlement, though hard labor and fi nes, known as weregild, are common. Few settlements are willing to feed prisoners unless they work off their sentence. Capital punishment is rare outside Anari domains, but not totally unknown. The exact method of execution varies, but most settlements go for beheading to get the deed over and done with. Among the other civilized races, outlawing is preferred over execution.
Outlaws are cut off from their kith and kin, and are forbidden from entering the realm under penalty of death. Anyone caught aiding a known outlaw is subject to a similar fate. To many outsiders, outlawing someone is effectively a death sentence (especially if done in winter), but the cultures that practice it don’t regard it this way. To them, the outlaw has been given a chance to survive and, should he die, it is the elements or beasts that will cause it, not their hands.
Weregild, or “man gold,” is a fi xed monetary value at-tached to the life of a man or woman based on their social status. Although a Saxa invention, all the civilized races have adopted it as an easy means of settling disputes.
Weregild is payable only for physical injuries, and not against opponents in offi cially sanctioned wars. At-tacking a man in times of peace is a crime. Killing an enemy in times of war is an act of survival. The nobility and priesthood of Hothar are quick to enforce payment
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
in order to avoid blood feuds. Failure to pay within 32 days can result in enforced slavery to the victim’s family or confi scation of property to settle the debt.
See Chapter 10 (p. 125) for details of how weregild works in the setting.
FUNERARY CUSTOMS
Everything dies, or so the old saying goes. As with most
other things, burial customs vary from race to race. The Saxa used to inter their dead in barrows (for no-
bles or important warriors) or in shallow graves. These days, they prefer to cremate their dead, either on pyres or, for nobles and heroes, in longships. Grave goods are still common, as it is believed the deceased needs these in the next world. Saxa never place traps or magical de-terrents in their graves, even those of powerful nobles, for they hold that if the grave is disturbed, the corpse will enact revenge on the graverobber. The Finnar and Tuomi have always cremated their dead.
The Anari of Alantaris Isle and in the Magocracy, hav-
ing never suffered the Liche-Priest’s power, still inter their dead, but do so without grave goods. According to their ancient customs, the spirit has no need for such things.
In Aspiria and Chalcis, the dead are buried in stone tombs or in wooden coffi ns nailed fi rmly shut and with short spikes on the inside of the lid. Should the occupant rise as an undead, he quickly fi nds himself impaled and trapped.
Elves of both races bury their dead and place a sap-ling on the grave. While the body provides the tree with nutrients, the spirit supposedly passes into the tree. The roots also pierce the corpse, pinning it to the ground and preventing it from being used as an undead. For this reason, elves treat all trees as sacred, using magic rather than axe to shape them.
Engros cremate their dead, often throwing pouches of pipeleaf on the pyre to ensure the spirit has some-thing to appease his ancestors when he gets to his fi nal destination. When a noble dies, his corpse is placed in his caravan, which becomes his pyre.
Dwarves place their dead on stone biers deep within their cities, leaving the corpse in full view so relatives and descendents can pay their respects. Many dwarves are buried with armor and weapons, and glyphs are placed on these objects to deter thieves. Although dwarves fear undead, necromancy has never troubled their ancient crypts.
TRAVEL
Few paved roads exist in Rassilon. Those that do exist
are leftovers from before the Blizzard War and are usu-ally in a poor state of repair. Most roads in use today are just tracks of compacted snow or ice marked by wheel ruts and are quickly lost when the snows fall.
During the winter, the ground often freezes solid, making travel relatively easy. In spring, when the ice thaws, most roads become quagmires of churned up mud. Most travelers prefer to make long journeys in winter (though this is risky) or summer.
Bandits and outlaws are making travel dangerous. Towns and cities only patrol the immediate countryside, leaving large areas totally unguarded. The Hearth Knights patrol the Hearthlands, but they have little permanent presence in the Hellfrost. For these reasons, most travel-ers make short trips or wait until they can join a caravan, favoring safety in numbers over any sense of urgency.
TRAVEL TOWERS
Shortly after the Roadwardens were formed, the orga-nization set about constructing a series of towers along the major roads of the Hearthlands. There is normally a travel tower every 10 hours march along the major roads (see Trade Routes below), and every 20 miles along less-er-traveled routes. Note that these towers only exist in the Hearthlands and do not extend into the Magocracy.
The towers are a uniform design, with two fl oors, each
LIFE IN RASSILON
having just a single room. Each fl oor has a fi replace, but no furnishings. Roadwardens keep the towers stocked as best they can with basic provisions and fi rewood. Although no offi cial charge is made to use the towers, visitors nearly always leave a donation, which is picked up by the local roadwarden on a regular basis, whether they use any of the provisions or not.
TRADE
Although many communities are self-suffi cient out
of necessity, they supply only the basic needs for the populace. Most villages, for instance, have a blacksmith, a weaver, a potter, and such, as well as farmers and herd-ers.
Trade in Rassilon occurs for three reasons. First, a community may produce excess of one type of good. Rather than let them go to waste, the goods are sold or exchanged.
Second, people enjoy luxuries and unusual goods, even relatively simple ones, and exotic goods (those not produced locally) are always welcome at the market. Ex-otic goods don’t have to be fantastic works of art—a vil-lage that produces green pottery may fi nd a ready market among nearby settlements, for instance.
Third, local demand often outstrips supply. Local crafters can rarely produce enough goods to fulfi ll ev-ery need in their community, and traders provide extra goods, though often at a slightly higher price.
TRADE ROUTES
There are several key trade routes in the Hearth-lands.
In the south there are three major trade routes. The fi rst, and oldest, runs from Drakeport up the mighty Crystalfl ow River to Bridgewater, then north to Aslov. The second runs through the Magocracy to Halfway, then north to Aslov. Various branches run from these roads, but trade along them is considerably less. The third begins at Sandvik and then winds west to Scathmoor, on the banks of the Crystalfl ow, from it joins the river’s trade route.
In the eastern Winterlands, the trade road passes through Hellfrost Keep, heads north, and then west, passing through Brae, before turning north to Seithrby and Far Reach. The eastern road takes a longer path, tak-ing in Myre and Cul, before branching into roads leading to Norvik and Vox.
In the western half there are several trade roads across Aspiria and Chalcis. The most important trade road runs from Glassport on the southern coast to New Asper, then northward through the Borderlands to Vimmar in the Lakelands. From here, it moves across the lake to the Glittersands.
Major water routes exist, the most prosperous being Glassport to the Imperial City or Port Helgen, Sacros to Leirvik, Iceport to Sandvik, and Drakeport to the Impe-rial City.
MARKETS & SHOPS
In most large settlements there are shops, usually run by a crafter, and thus specializing in one commodity. All settlements host a market, where local crafters and visit-ing merchants display their goods side by side.
In villages and small towns, the weekly market is of-ten the only time non-essential goods can be purchased, with actual shops being a rarity. Markets are also social affairs, an excuse to while away a few hours gossiping with friends over a beer or two, and to hear news from other lands.
Entertainers (sometimes local, but usually part of a mercantile caravan) put on shows, plays, and displays for the locals. A few entertainers make a comfortable living working the trade routes, but most barely make enough to get buy. Still, it beats working in the fi elds 14 hours a day.
MAGIC SHOPS
Relics (permanent magic items) are extremely rare and are certainly not available for sale in shops. Even in the old days, when spellcasters knew more powerful arts, artifi cers, mages, and priests could not create these things. Most relics currently in circulation are heirlooms dating from before the Blizzard War or have been “liber-ated” from ancient tombs.
Of course, charlatans with a rudimentary knowledge of magic have no qualms about selling fake magic items to ignorant fools, even offering “discounts” to secure deals (which still net them hundreds of scields profi t).
Potions, scrolls, and other temporary items, however, can be found for sale in cities and large towns, and some-times even at major rural markers. Loath to hand out po-tentially deadly items, the majority of mages charge high prices and never sell items containing offensive spells, at least not to the masses. Healing potions, amulets of armor, lucky charms, and the like are typically the limit of a mage’s wares, though those with enough money can easily acquire lethal items, like gems of destruction, acid fl asks, and lightning rods.
COINAGE & BARTERING
As mentioned before, the standard currency of the Hearthlands is the gold scield. The only other currency in daily use is the seolfor scield (“ silver shield,” or ss), of which there are 10 to a gold coin.
Coins are normally only used in Anari or mixed Anari/ Saxa settlements, as well as nonhuman settlements. The Finnari and Saxa prefer to barter, swapping goods or services for items or services of equal value. Coins are required when visiting the market or a town, however (where there may be Anari or nonhuman traders).
The Iron Guild is experimenting with a system of credit notes. Rather than transport vast sums of money through hostile lands, merchants instead deposit their money at an Iron Guildhouse. In return they receive a
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
letter. A Guild sponsored mage then sends a note of the transaction via voice on the wind to the Guildhouse at the merchant’s destination.
When this letter is handed in at the other Iron Guild-house, the merchant receives a sum of money equal to what he deposited, less a 1% handling fee.
LANGUAGE
Although the races retain their racial tongues, Trader
is the most widely spoken language among the civilized races. A mishmash of words from all the tongues formed around an Anari base grammar, Trader is easy to learn and speak. Naturally it has evolved over the centuries, adopting new words from different cultures, but a person living in the fi rst few decades after the Blizzard War would have little diffi culty understanding a modern speaker.
Few folk bother to learn many languages. Most know only their native tongue and Trader, though in rural ar-eas, speakers of Trader are often limited to those with
need to deal with outsiders. In most instances, these will be crafters and the local priests, though educated citizens may have picked up enough Trader to hold a conversation.
Lorekeepers are the most linguistically versatile, for knowledge of all races is important to them if they are to preserve the writings of history for future generations. Hearth Knights often learn a smattering of Frosttongue, the common language of their main enemies, and many know Orcish and Giant. Mercenaries tend to pick up key words and phrases during their travels, as do many merchants.
It is important to note that while hearth elven and taiga elven share many words, their languages have evolved differently since the races split.
Taiga elves had no words for deciduous trees until quite recently, but there are dozens of words for types of snow, subtle changes in the wind direction, temperature variations, and so on.
Likewise, hearth elves have more than one word for an oak tree, depending on its location, the season, the
LIFE IN RASSILON
animals that live in its branches, its age, and so forth. As such, the two languages are treated as separate tongues. Perhaps in centuries to come the languages will again merge. Then again, if the ice continues to encroach, hearth elven may simply cease to exist as the taiga elves grow dominant.
THE LAND
Although the entire continent is affected by the Hell-frost to some degree, not everywhere is covered by snow and ice permanently.
THE HEARTHLANDS
The southern and central Hearthlands still enjoy
pleasant summers, and temperatures can rise to over 80 degrees F on a hot day, though typically they are in the mid-60s. Further north, in the shadow of the Icebarrier Mountains or nearer the open plains of the western con-tinent, 60 degrees is considered a heat wave and a cause for celebration.
Winter temperatures near the Icebarrier and plains frequently drop as low as 15 degrees, with periods as low as 5 when the Hellfrost winds blow hard and steady. Toward the coasts, temperatures regularly stay above freezing in the winter, but can drop to lows of around 25 degrees in mid-season.
Snowfall is frequent in the winter across the entire region, though it is far worse in the north, averaging as much as ten feet over the season.
Every house has a hearth, be it a small fi replace in each room or a central fi re pit. Most houses burn wood or peat, though animal dung is typically stored in case of shortages of other fuels. Coal is a rarity, and found only in the richest households (or those of coal miners, of course). Given the choice between fuel or food, a deci-sion more and more peasants much make each year, fuel is considered the most important. A man might last a week or more without food in his belly, but when the snows begin to fall, death by freezing takes only a matter of hours.
Outside of the settlements, there is no law and or-der, no one to combat the ever-growing threat of orcs, goblins, trolls, or other nightmarish creatures, and no one to help travelers who fall prey to bandits except for scattered patrols of Roadwardens, and their number are stretched thinner and thinner with each passing year. Communities are thus seen as oases of peace in a sea of chaos.
THE WINTERLANDS
The Winterlands set above the Hearthlands, and are
divided into two regions, the Low and High. On the eastern side, the Low Winterlands extend from
the Icebarrier Mountains north to the foothills of the
Shattered Moor, run around the top of Nerenel, the taiga elf forest, and then down through the Winding Peaks to the mouth of the Highwater. In the west, where no moun-tains protect the lands, the Low Winterlands begin as far south as Chalcis’ Highmoor, and continue north around Witchwood to the Sigilrun River, the northern shores of Serpent Lake, and the Iceblade Mountains. Above these imaginary boundaries lies the High Winterlands.
In the northern Low Winterlands, snow lies on low-lying ground for 9 months of the year, though the hills of the Shattered Moor are rarely ever snow-free. The temperature is typically around –5 degrees in mid-winter (though it does get colder) and rises to an average of 40 in summer.
Further south, the lands enjoy an actual summer, where the ground is snow free for as much as two months, depending on the weather. Even down here, however, only the surface is ice-free. Beneath the top-soil, the ground is permanently frozen all year round, which hampers the growing of all but hardy root veg-etable crops. It does allow for goats and sheep to graze, however. The temperature rarely reaches heights of over 55 degrees during the summer, and in winter, regularly drops below 5 degrees.
The High Winterlands are near-permanently frozen. The temperature is below freezing for most of the year, and even in high summer, it struggles to rise above freez-ing. At night, and when the Hellfrost wind blows, it can drop to as low as –55 degrees.
The ground is buried beneath a deep blanket of snow and ice except on the warmest summer days, when patches of hardy grasses poke through for a few days, before being covered again.
Hearths burn all year round in the Winterlands. In spring, vast bonfi res are lit to melt the frozen soil to al-low planting of hardy root crops, the main staple of the region.
Yet for all the hardships and deprivations they suffer, the citizens of the Winterlands are no less hospital to strangers than those of the Hearthlands. Perhaps, as the locals joke, misery loves company.
THE HELLFROST
The border to the Hellfrost is clearly defi ned by a
wall of ice towering several miles above the surrounding land. Beyond this sits the Hellfrost proper, an area of unnatural cold where there is only one season—winter.
The Hellfrost Core is supposedly located in and around an area known as the Coldfi re Sea, a great mass of coldfi re that destroys any wooden ship that dares to sail it, but exact details are hard to come by. Indeed, none of the locations of the deep Hellfrost are well known. Only a few Lance Knights have penetrated the outer reaches of the frozen north, and even fewer have returned alive.
Few natural animals, such as woolly mammoths and polar bears, exist in this realm. Only the vilest of crea-tures can cope with the terrible cold and the kill-or-be-killed mentality that pervades this land.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
A POTTED HISTORY
Only fragmentary evidence remains of major events before the Blizzard War and the Ice Rise, and many lesser events have been lost to time. Scholars talk of powerful, ancient empires ruled by noble and wise men, all of which were reduced to ruins by the Blizzard War or now lie buried beneath the ice and snow. –611: The Convocation of Elementalists is found-ed. –542: The Anari Empire is born. It dominates south-ern Rassilon for the next fi ve centuries. –429: Demongate Wars start. Mad cultists create and open a series of portals leading to the Abyss using an artifact known as the Black Key. –400: Demongate Wars end with the destruction of the last demonic outpost. Terrible suffering has been unleashed on the land over the last quarter-century. The Black Key is shattered and its parts hid-den. –352: Hela’s betrayal. Hela, keeper of the under-world, goes insane and unlocks the gates to the Abyss. Evil souls fl ee to the mortal realm where they inhabit corpses, creating the fi rst true undead. Hela becomes the goddess of undeath, her role as guard-ian taken by Scaetha. –316: The undead armies of the Liche-Priest ravage what is now the northern, eastern, and central Low Winterlands. The Liche-Priest’s bony hand extends into the west, but expansion is halted by Aspiria and Chalcis. –222: Anari fi nally complete their conquest of the Saxa lands, dominating the Hearthlands as far east as the Thunor Range and Brokentail Mountains. Despite oppression, the Saxa culture in conquered lands is not stamped out, and it later rekindles. –28: The Liche-Priest’s army is shattered, the vile fi end entombed for eternity. -25: The Blizzard War begins. An army of frigid beasts advances rapidly from the north, destroying everything in its path, as temperatures plummet to many degrees below freezing. Countless people are killed. The gods Kenaz and Sigel vanish just before the destruction occurs. When the destruction ends, 25 years later, Rassilon is virtually depopulated. -15: Contact is lost with Karad Khan, the greatest dwarf city. -10: The southern nations, divided and weakened, rally together and begin an offensive of total de-struction against the Hellfrost armies. 0: The Ice Rise. The defeated Hellfrost armies rap-idly retreat back north. The Icewall rises overnight, creating behind it the Hellfrost. Winters immediate-ly harden, and snow and ice begin to creep down from the north, blanketing the land.
1–100 IR: Plague, famine, and constant warfare wrack Rassilon. Many more people die before order is slowly restored. 45 IR: The Magocracy is founded. The position of Mage-King is introduced in later decades. 50 IR: Drakeport introduces the scield as its curren-cy. Use of the coin spreads along mercantile routes and is still the standard value of currency today. 83 IR: Founding of the Hearth Knights. 160 IR: Having driven the Anari out from their for-mer lands, the Saxa found the Marklands. 201 IR: Hellfrost Keep completed. The only easily accessible land route to the Winterlands is sealed off. 246 IR: Crystalfl ow Confederacy founded. 274 IR: The Frozen Forest comes in existence, kill-ing thousands of taiga elves. 319 IR: Orc invasion of Chalcis ends in orc defeat at the Battle of Thunor’s Fury. 341-345 IR: Golem Uprising. Golems rise up against their masters in a bloody confl ict. The Golem Ban Decree is signed by the Mage-King, the Convocation of Elementalists, and the frost dwarf lords, making the creation of any form of golem punishable by death. 381 IR: Frost giant army smashed in the Battle-lands. Raids are halted for many years as the giants recover their strength. 389 IR: The metallic beings known as the Scaven-gers appear. 440 IR: The Sisters of Mercy are founded. 441 IR: Karad Marn invaded by orcs. The battle to liberate continues to the present time. 444 IR: Karad Noshrek is lost. 445 IR: Frost giants begin raiding from the Giant’s Throne. 449 IR: The Roadwardens are founded. 469 IR: The Mistlands are swathed in permanent fog. 471 IR to present: The Siphoning. Mages begin to suffer a strange loss of power, which has grown more frequent as time passes. 475 IR: Foundation of the Knights Hrafn. 479 IR to present: Orcs pour from the Mace Moun-tains and conquer southern Vestmark. Much of it still remains in orc hands (now called Orcmark). 492 IR: The frostborn-dominated Barony of Cul is founded, the fi rst domain ruled by the new race. 497 IR to present: Orcs assault the city of Ostvik with a vast army of siege engines. The siege contin-ues to the present day. 499 IR to present: Current day.
This chapter takes a quick look at some of the better known organizations found within the Hearthlands and the wintry wastes beyond that characters can join.
BLUDGEONERS
The quaint caravans of the engros drive slowly across the land of Rassilon, moving on some unseen breeze or tide. Smoke drifts idly from the chimneys, children play happily, dancing and singing, and women sew on make-shift looms, seemingly ignorant of the hideous monsters lurking in the landscapes they pass.
However, the engros are far from ignorant of the dan-gers of Rassilon. Among every family is at least one Blud-geoner, a warrior dedicated to the protection of their traveling household. While other engros dream of the profi ts to be found in the next village, the Bludgeoners keep back the hordes of darkness.
Most outsiders believe the Bludgeoners are just a community police force, there to locate “lost” horses, break up the occasional drunken brawl, and to keep an eye on non–engro visitors who might otherwise lose a few coins. And that’s how the organization likes to be seen, because if the majority of outsiders knew how dan-gerous the engros were, they would likely persecute the engros more than they already do.
The sling is the Bludgeoners’ weapon of choice, being light, cheap, low-maintenance, and easy to fi nd ammunition in most environments. The organization is named because of the blunt force trauma their weapons infl ict, though most outsiders believe it is because of the sticks they carry (which they use to drive back the “lost” animals and when breaking up fi ghts).
Bludgeoners operate independently or in small groups much of the time, but when families, clans, and tribes meet, they form larger bands. In order to conceal their numbers from outsiders, engros use secret hand-shakes to identify each other.
THE CONVOCATION
Founded over a thousand years ago, the Convocation of Elementalists brought elementalists together under a common set of laws and guidelines. It survived the machinations of the Liche-Priest and the destruction of the Blizzard War only because of its unity.
Before this time, elementalists would gather only with those of their own element. Centuries of open at-tacks and murder led to bad feelings among the masses, which saw the mages as power mad individuals. Worse still, elementalists would often cheat the masses when asked to manufacture potions or charms, further sullying the name of their art.
The founding of the Convocation ended most dis-putes, forced members to be licensed or declared out-casts, lay down a set of rules which elementalists must live by, and in doing so made elementalism a respectable art once more. Frost dwarves and elf elementalists, who have both refused to join, are exempt from these rules. A few engro have joined the Convocation, more out of curiosity than anything else. Some human elementalists have refused to join, especially among the Finnar. Such folk are not welcome at Convocation buildings.
The Convocation has its headquarters in the Imperial City, though it maintains a strong presence in Aspiria, among other places. Technically, the arkhwisards at the Imperial City are the supreme masters of the Convoca-tion, but elementalists in distant regions often consider themselves independent of any central authority.
THE ELEMENTAL ORDERS
The Convocation still maintains separation within elementalism, and all mages belong to one of the four elemental orders. Regardless of how many elements a mage has mastered, he is always grouped by the one he learned fi rst, which is considered his prime element.
ORGANIZATIONS
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
Elementalists are required to wear robes matching the color of their order. Air mages wear white, earth mages brown or green (personal preferences are allowed), wa-ter mages blue, and fi re mages wear red.
As a mage masters more elements, he is required to introduce extra colors into his robes. However, the pre-dominant color must always be that of the element he studied as an apprentice.
A few elementalists now believe that hrimwisards should be accepted into the Convocation, claiming that coldfi re is a distinct element. To many this is akin to heresy. Not only do hrimwisards manipulate magic in a different way than elementalists, but coldfi re is not con-sidered an element by the civilized races.
TITLES
Elementalists use titles to denote their status, and how many elements they have mastered, though not which ones. That’s covered by the color of their robes. Apprentices are known simply as Aprentis.
Once an apprentice qualifi es and leaves his master’s service, he takes the title Prynciple. A mage who has mas-tered two elements is called a Magus, and a mage with all three elements a Maegister A mage who masters all four elements takes the title, Arkhwisard.
Ranking among those of equal title is informal. Among his peers, a mage must earn his respect through his actions, not demand it because he holds a title. Ap-prentices are not required to obey any mage other than a member of the Four or their own mentor.
The Four is the ruling body of the Convocation. The council consists of four arkhwisards, each taking a seat according to which of the four elements he studied fi rst. They are elected to serve for four years by their peers.
In order to settle ties when voting, each arkhwisard serves one year as Primus. In the event of a tie, the vote always goes in favor of the Primus.
The current members of the Four are Arkhwisard of Eir, Urit Biscali (male Anari), Arkhwisard of Ertha, Gal-winith Treelimb (female hearth elf), Arkhwisard of Fyr, Davina ap-Meredith (female Anari), and Arkhwisard of Waeter, Marmaduke Bentwhistle (male engro)
THE GRAY LEGION
The Gray Legion is the most renowned mercenary company in Rassilon. Tales of their campaigns are many, and children of all races play games of Gray Legionaries versus orcs, with the Gray Legion always victorious.
It is true in the 30 years since their founding they have never retreated from a fi ght, no matter the odds. What is less known, or more likely ignored, is that the Legion has not always been victorious. Whereas other companies will leave the fi eld when the battle turns against them, the Gray Legion, once committed to a cause, fi ghts to the last man.
Legionaries have been called many things by many people; suicidal, brave, reckless, and insane being just a few, but none truly sums up their refusal to run from cer-tain death. Whereas other mercenaries fi ght for money (or more rarely, a just cause), the Legion fi ghts because its members have nothing else to live for except a good death. This doesn’t mean that members are suicidal, however. They have no wish to throw away their lives for a meaningless cause, but if their death makes a dif-ference, even a small one, then they die knowing their sacrifi ce was not in vain.
The company accepts only those who have nowhere else to go and absolutely nothing left to lose. Criminals, refugees, and disgraced nobles are welcomed equally. Potential recruits with familial ties are sent home, for the Gray Legion has no wish to impart the sorrow of losing a loved one on kinfolk. It does not discriminate against race, gender, or religion. Recruits who take the oath of allegiance are given a new identity and protection from the law. No member is required to say why he wishes to join, nor to speak of his past. For Legionaries, life ef-fectively begins when they join the Gray Legion.
Despite its name, the Legion actually comprises just a single company, around 140 strong. In overall command is the Gray Captain. The Legion has had only one cap-tain, that being its founder, Daisy, a female engro. Her comrades call her the Gray Lady. Captain Daisy has never revealed why she founded the Legion.
Individual members are allowed to travel their own roads, seeking good causes to support and making a dif-ference anyway they can, but must respond to a call to arms from any fellow Legionary.
The Legion’s banner is a plain, gray cloth, stained in the blood of those who have carried it into battle.
HEARTH KNIGHTS
Disease, famine, and warfare wracked Rassilon dur-ing the decades after the Blizzard War. Clerics, once the lynchpins of society, were powerless to stop the rapid disintegration of society. Although civilization quickly regained a slim foothold, the former kingdoms had shat-tered into rival city-states, baronies, and jarldoms. As the winters deepened and the Hellfrost beasts began their rapacious attacks, those unable, or unwilling, to hire the many mercenaries who found their services greatly in demand looked to their neighbors for aid. Charity, however, became a thing of the past.
Baron Arthan Gulver was a minor Anari lord among many. One night he dreamt of two dragons, one gold and one white, fi ghting. The Hellfrost dragon slew the gold, and the land of Rassilon became covered in ice, its people enslaved by frost giants. On awakening, Gulver realized his dream was a dire warning. If the people did not stop their petty feuds, the winter would devour them.
Summoning his 12 most loyal knights, Gulver pre-sented them with a vision of stability, a vision of hope.
ORGANIZATIONS
They would found a new order of knights, the Hearth Knights, whose duty it would be to aid any township in peril, protect the southern lands (the most densely populated), and to fi ght against the Hellfrost hordes.
Although few in number, the knights were more than a match for the bands of thugs and mercenaries troubling the land, and support for them quickly grew. Although they asked for no reward, the order grew rich on dona-tions from grateful citizens and from the treasuries of the goblin and orc nests they cleared.
Gulver was a pragmatist. He knew that no matter how powerful the knighthood became, it did not have the resources to stop the advance of winter. In his fi nal days, he summoned his inner circle and ordered them to construct a castle across the mouth of Hellfrost Pass. The mountains were a natural barrier to the advancing ice, and the pass was the only route through for the fell denizens of the north lands. Although it took almost a century to construct, Hellfrost Keep was completed to Gulver’s design. Gulver’s corpse was entombed in the crypt beneath the stout walls.
Since Gulver’s death, the snow has advanced consid-erably further, bringing with it harsher winters and more dangerous beasts. With famine and disease returning, not to mention countless thousands of refugees fl eeing the ice, the knights have found their resources stretched. Patrols in strength are limited to the three forts around Hellfrost Keep, leaving the northern settlements to fend for themselves. The situation is far worse in the west, where the Knights’ presence is minimal. Lone knights still take battle into the frozen wastes, but the order as a whole is refocusing its attention to ensuring no evil crosses through Hellfrost Pass.
ORDERS
Within the Hearth Knights are three distinct orders, the Shield, Sword, and Lance.
The lowest ranking knights are the Shield Knights. They guard Hellfrost Pass and man the forts in Heligio-land, as well as any towns and villages within the borders who will allow their presence. Although they perform patrols, they are primarily a static force, waiting for the enemy to make his presence felt before they strike.
Next there are the Sword Knights, who actively travel the Hellfrost in search of beasts to slay. Sword Knights usually operate from the forts rather than Hellfrost Keep, traveling deep into the wastes for extended periods and returning only to re-supply and make reports.
In order to become a Sword Knight, a knight must spend six months in the outer Hellfrost and slay a fear-some Hellfrost beast in single combat. In game terms, the creature must have the Immunity (Cold) ability and have a Toughness rating at least 6 higher than the knight’s.
The smallest order is the Lance Knights. These hardy souls spend much of their time in the Hellfrost core, tracking down and eliminating threats to the Hearth-lands, searching for routes through the great mountain ranges, and mapping the land.
To qualify as a Lance Knight, a knight must fi rst serve a minimum of a year as a Sword Knight. He must then quest into the Hellfrost for a minimum of six months and slay a powerful Hellfrost beast in single combat. In game terms, the beast must have the Immunity (Cold) ability and have a Toughness rating at least 10 higher than the knight’s own.
RANKS
Although all three orders of knights were created as equals (each just having a different role), over time the Lance Knights have come to be seen as superior to the Sword, and the Sword superior to the Shield.
However, within each order there are actual ranks. Be-ing the most numerous of the orders, the Shield Knights have the most rank distinctions. Shield Knights are the lowest rank, then Shield Sergeant, Shield Captain, and fi nally Shield Commander. Within the Sword there are only Sword Knights, Sword Captains, and Sword Com-manders. Lance Knights don’t use any ranks, there being so few of them to make positions of leadership within the order meaningless.
The chain of command works on order, then rank. A Lance Knight is seen as superior to all those beneath him, a Sword Commander senior to a Sword Captain, a Sword Captain is higher than a Sword Knight, a Sword Knight outranks a Shield Commander, and so on down.
Knights are addressed as Sir or Lady <fi rst name> when not using their rank. Thus, Sword Captain Ivana Targinsdohtor can also be addressed as Lady Ivana.
At the very top of the order are the Masters, who take the title Lord or Lady. The head of the entire order is the Lord Marshal, who must be a Lance Knight. Beneath him is the Lord Deputy, his assistant and a Sword Knight, and the Lord Seneschal, a Shield Knight in charge of fi nances and logistics. These titles never change because of the sex of the holder.
Each Master selects his own successor, though ap-proval must be sought from one of the other Masters to prevent abuses of power, nepotism, and such from tainting the order.
The current heads of the Hearth Knights are Lord Marshal Jaufre Humbert (male Anari), Lord Deputy Ag-nes ap-Jurgen (female Anari), and Lord Seneschal Uther Penharksunu (male Saxa).
EMBLEMS
The order has a central banner, a long fl ag with a large white segment, a small blue segment, and a smaller black segment. These divides represent the three sub-orders of knights and their comparative numbers.
Shield Knights sport a stylized sun design, a circle with eight radial triangles protruding from it. The shield is white and the triangles yellow. Sword Knights sport the emblem of a sword with a fi ery blade. Lance Knights carry the emblem of a fi ery lance piercing a Hellfrost dragon’s skull.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
IRON GUILD
Founded centuries ago, the Iron Guild began as a mercenary company known as the Iron Hand. After the numerous small wars which followed the Blizzard War, the Hand offered its services to the merchants of Bridge-water and Drakeport. The Hand grew wealthy, expanded, and changed its name to something less militant.
Guild protected caravans don’t come cheap, but the Guild has an excellent reputation and issues swift pun-ishments to members who desert their post or steal from their merchant employers.
These days the Guild has major offi ces in every town and mercantile port and can call on several thousand sol-diers. Guild soldiers are paid by merchants and receive no wages from the Guild. Every member pays 10% of their earnings to the Guild, which is in effect a fi nder’s fee. The current Guild headquarters is in Drakeport, though there are plans to relocate to Halfway.
KNIGHTS HRAFN
When the Orc Wars broke out twenty years ago, a skilled but impoverished noble, Baron Adelmar of Gal-moor, had the idea of creating an order of knights focus edon providing leadership to armies in need.
Adelmar promptly sold his ancestral lands to the neighboring Magocracy and gathered a small cadre of like-minded individuals. Within three years, the Order of the Knights Hrafn was born.
The order is divided into two houses. The lower house is for commanders focusing on small unit tactics., typically skilled at commanding a single company of men. The Upper House is reserved for strategists, skilled at maneuvering entire armies.
Any town, noble, or mercenary force meeting their fee (200 gold scields per month for tacticians and 500 gs per month for strategists) can hire a Knight Hrafn.
The knights care little for ideals of chivalry or honor, focusing their energy on winning battles with the mini-mum amount of bloodshed to their forces. While a few rogue knights have used their skills to aid orcs or become tyrant rulers of bandit companies, most are dedicated to preserving the Hearthlands’ rightful rulers.
Castle Hrafn, a small castle built with the profi ts the order’s mercenary service has earned, serves as their headquarters. Any Knight Hrafn can reside at the castle, free of charge for as long as he desires. Knights also have access to the order’s extensive collection of military trea-ties and maps.
The emblem of the order is a raven’s head. Members of the Lower House have a single-headed raven, repre-senting their focus on a given objective. Upper House members sport a double-headed bird, indicating that they must be aware of the entire battlefi eld.
LOREKEEPERS
As far as most engros and humans are concerned, time began the day the ice rose. Most folk don’t have any un-derstanding of times before the Blizzard War, and the great majority looks to the future, to the next harvest and to the one beyond, not into matters of old.
The elves and dwarves have records stretching back long before this time, but they do not share their knowledge with lesser races, or even each other. Engros were never ones for history at the best of times and never kept de-tailed records of anything other than songs.
What major archives do exist among the humans can be found in the Impe-rial City (at the Guild), Drakeport (in Lord Draconov’s archives), Far Reach (again with the Guild), and in the Cita-del (which is not open to outsiders for any reason).
In order to ensure knowledge could never be entirely lost, a group of sages and skalds formed the Lorekeepers,
ORGANIZATIONS
a society of historians, archivists, and treasure hunters. The organization numbers barely 200 souls.
Lorekeepers travel the land, looking for ancient scrolls and texts, copying them, and handing copies to their col-leagues for safe keeping. The destruction of much of the land’s history in the Blizzard War taught these learned men not to put all their scrolls in one basket.
Although basically scholars, the Lorekeepers have been known to use extreme methods to retrieve scrolls from the few private collectors around. They aren’t fool-ish enough to go up against the Convocation or Lord Draconov, and instead pay for access to their archives.
RELIQUARY
The art of constructing relics is a mystery to mages and priests alike. In a bid to prevent existing relics from being used to gain power and in order to study them to perhaps unlock the secrets of their creation, a group of elementalists forsook the Convocation and founded the Reliquary, an organization dedicated to locating, study-ing, and protecting permanent magic artifacts.
The organization seeks out, retrieves, and stores only permanent relics. It has no interest in alchemical devices, nor in the staves of heahwisards, which are considered part of the mage and thus limited in their usage.
The Reliquary operates out of the Citadel, a great fortress in the Brokentail Mountains. Contained within are numerous libraries, laboratories, and vaults, the lat-ter being guarded both by powerful magic traps and an order of soldiers known as the Guardians of the Arcane.
The Reliquary does not allow outsiders to visit the vaults or libraries, nor does it believe that anyone other than its esteemed members should own relics. It is not above theft to recover relics, but it has never offi cially sanctioned murder in the pursuit of its goal.
MEMBERSHIP
One does not volunteer; one is chosen. Potential members must have a desire to see the mysteries of the universe unlocked and hold some disdain for those who would use relics to further their own aims.
The organization is divided into three divisions, jok-ingly known as Finders, Keepers, and Seekers, each serv-ing a specifi c role.
Finders (more properly known as Reliquae, singular Reliqus) work to locate and retrieve magical artifacts, either from their current owners or from ruins. Although many are highly accomplished tomb raiders or thieves, they consider petty larceny beneath their calling.
Protecting the objects collected by the Finders are the Guardians of the Arcane, more commonly referred to as Keepers. While a few venture out into the world, most are stationed at the Citadel. The Guardians are simply a police force, there to ensure thieves do not plunder the Citadel’s treasure vaults.
Seekers (known internally as Arcanologists) are sages, scholars, and archivists, devoted to unlocking the secret of artifact creation. They spend their days in musty librar-ies researching snippets of ancient lore or performing experiments (which always fail). Most remain in the Cita-del, but occasionally, they must travel to other centers of learning or to consult with mages outside the Reliquary.
ROADWARDENS
Although the roads of the Hearthlands are dangerous, they are not completely unguarded. As well as the Iron Guild, there is an informal organization known as the Roadwardens watching over travelers.
Founded just 50 years ago by Sir Magnar Cornelius, a scion of a powerful family in Spyre, the Roadwardens work alone or in small bands, traveling the roads and trails of the Hearthlands offering friendship and protec-tion to anyone they deem in need of their support. Some use a travel tower as a base, protecting the area around the refuge, whereas others prefer a true nomadic life.
Roadwardens do not charge for their services, fund-ing themselves by looting any bandits or orc marauders they slay, though they do accept voluntary donations. Many merchants have donated thousands of scields to the organization, valuing the safe haven of a travel tower on the long, deserted trade routes.
TRAVEL TOWERS
Sir Magnar came up with the idea of the travel tow-ers. Although visitors leave donations at the towers, the organization is always short of cash. Roadwardens are expected to use any “loot” captured from bandits or orcs to keep the towers stocked, and to devote at least a few weeks a year in helping maintain the towers’ bricks and mortar.
SISTERHOOD OF MERCY
The Sisterhood is an order of healers based primarily in the town of Sanctuary, which they founded. They have a small aid station in Aslov’s Tent Town and in Hellfrost Keep and have plans to establish Healing Houses in Drakeport, Halfway, and Ravensburg in the near future.
Founded by Mother Felise, an elderly Anari, the Sis-ters (all are female) are master healers, learned in the ways of herbalism, bone setting, midwifery, dentistry, and so forth. A few are actually water elementalists who have forsaken the Convocation and now answer only to Mother Felise. Mother Felise herself is blessed with what appears to be miraculous powers of healing, though she is not a cleric of Eira, goddess of healing.
The Sisters do not charge for their services, but instead ask that patients perform some favor at a later
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
date. This may be a donation (not a fee) to purchase new equipment or rare herbs, physical help in maintaining or building a wing to the Healing House, the center of the Sisterhood’s activity in Sanctuary, providing a Sister shelter on her travels, and such like.
Favors are always within the patient’s ability to “pay.” A farmer may be asked to donate a small portion of his crops to the Sisters or help in erecting a new building, for instance, whereas a noble may be asked to help fund a new building by providing materials or a workforce.
Player character Sisters are mendicants, sent out into the world to provide healing services to the needy.
The Sisters are pacifi sts, believing that life is sacred. However, this makes them easy targets for bandits or roving orcs, so they are protected by the Swords of Ne-cessity, a group of warriors healed by the Sisters, who pledge loyalty to them.
Naturally, the Sisters and the clergy of Eira do not see eye-to-eye. The clerics believe they have a monopoly on healing the poor, but their numbers are stretched, and the Sisters have fi lled the gaps.
THIEVES’ GUILDS
Numerous thieves’ guilds operate throughout Rassi-lon, though most are confi ned to the major towns. Each guild claims ownership of all nefarious activities within its territory and is quick to punish freelancers.
In most instances the guilds operate in secret, ruled over by a shadowy guildmaster (or mistress). Only in Freetown do the guilds operate openly, and then only because Lord Blackhand allows it.
Despite being, literally, dens of thieves, each guild has its own by-laws, which members are expected to follow for the good of the guild. Most guilds avoid robbing any-one in the slums, not only because the wretches who dwell in such areas have little to steal, but also because they rely on the populace to act as their eyes and ears. In return, the guilds hand out a little of their gains to ease the suffering of the locals.
Guilds use a secret language, known as Fingerspeak, a form of sign language used to impart basic informa-tion, such as the ease of cutting a mark’s purse, warn-ings about watch activities, and so on. It’s little use for holding a conversation, however. Every guild has its own unique sign, so members can recognize each other with-out alerting passersby.
THE THIRTEEN WARRIORS
The Thirteen Warriors began as a group of thirteen Saxa nobles who answered a call from a distant kinsman during the Blizzard War to help protect his land against barbaric frostreavers and Vendahl.
Although successful, the surviving eight heroes returned
home to fi nd their own lands had been destroyed in their absence. Realizing they had nothing left but their sword arms, and an overriding hatred of the frostreavers and Ven-dahl, the survivors formed a brotherhood sworn to track down and kill these barbaric fi ends wherever they lurked.
Though none of the original members are still alive, the organization, offi cially known as the Brotherhood of Thirteen Warriors, continues to uphold the quest of the founders with zeal.
Despite its name, the organization is rarely at full strength. Typically it numbers less than ten, but even when they recruit new members, there are never more than thirteen at any one time. All members wear a badge on their left shoulder, a circle of 13 stars surrounding a severed bear’s head.
The Thirteen Warriors spend virtually all of their time in and around the Shattered Moor, dispatching merciless vengeance on the dark inhabitants. Although they prefer to concentrate their efforts on frostreavers and Vendahl, they happily slaughter any other evil creature foolish enough to cross their path.
WOOD WARDENS
Many dangers lurk in the dark forests of the Hearth-lands. Rapacious orcs, fearsome forest dragons, and de-structive forest giants are just a few of the fell beasts that lurk in the gloom beneath the heavy foliage. Even parts of elven forests are not safe to travel. Yet all is not lost, for patrolling these leafy realms are the Wood Wardens.
Blending elven druidism with hardened steel, the Wardens are a multi-racial organization sworn to safe-guard the forests of the Hearthlands.
Originally founded by the Shining King, though not under his direct command, the Wardens still retain good relationships with the hearth elves, and non-elf recruits are taught ancient elven magic, enabling them to talk with beasts.
The head of the organization is Parthelo Boughrun-ner, a hearth elf nobleman and a distant relative of the Shining King. He holds the title of Warden-General.
Beneath him are the Warden-Captains, offi cers re-sponsible for one forest (or a smaller part of a large for-est). Each Warden-Captain is responsible for a number of Wardens, the common members of the organization.
Intelligent monsters, like orcs, found among the for-ests are shown no mercy, but there are other menaces to the tranquility of the forests.
Loggers, hunters, and trappers who take only what they need are usually left alone by the Wardens, and sometimes even act as agents, reporting signs of danger-ous denizens. But those who would rape the forest of its bounty can expect severe warnings (at best) and attacks (at worst).
The Wardens are also on good terms with nykr, skog-sra, and wood wights living in their domains, as well as the few remaining enclaves of tree men.
For convenience, all generic setting rules for the Hell-frost campaign setting have been grouped into a single location.
TEMPERATURE
Rather than list temperatures and temperature chang-es in terms of a specifi c range or number of degrees, Hellfrost uses a system of loosely defi ned temperature levels.
Depending on where one is on the continent, there are varying temperature ranges, as listed below. Usually, the exact temperature is irrelevant during game play, as any temperature within a level gives the same Vigor pen-alty. The Vigor column lists the penalty to Vigor rolls to resist the effects of cold (see Savage Worlds).
TEMPERATURE TABLE
Although any reference to actual temperatures is in Fahrenheit throughout this book, we have included
a Centigrade column here for our European fans. The conversion is not exact, but suffi ces for game play.
CLOTHING
The Savage Worlds rules state that a character makes a Vigor roll for every four hours he spends in tempera-tures below freezing, with a cumulative –1 penalty per 20 degrees lower. This assumes he’s wearing a warm shirt and cloak.
In Hellfrost, the penalties listed in the table assume a character is already wearing such apparel. The constant, biting wind gives a higher penalty to Vigor rolls in this setting, making proper winter clothing essential even in the temperate regions during winter. A character wear-ing less substantial clothing than a warm shirt and cloak gets an additional –2 penalty to his Vigor rolls.
NIGHTTIME
At night, the temperature drops 1 level as the warmth from the weak sun leeches away, leaving the terrain bit-terly cold.
GENERIC SETTING RULES
TEMPERATURE TABLE
Hearth Low Winter High Winter Hellfrost Temp (F) Temp (C) Vigor
Summer — — — 69 to 53 20 to 12 N/A
Spring/fall Summer — — 52 to 33 11 to 1 N/A
Winter Spring/fall Summer — 32 to 13 0 to –10 –1
— Winter Spring/fall — 12 to –7 –11 to –21 –2
— — Winter — –8 to –27 –22 to –32 –3
— — — Outer –28 to –47 –33 to –44 –4
— — — Core –48 to –67 –45 to –55 –5
— — — Core, at night –68 or lower –56 or lower –6
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
SHELTER
Whether it is a cave, snow hole, a tent, or a refuge spell, shelter keeps out the biting winds. Shelter grants a +1 to +4 bonus to Vigor rolls to resist the cold, depend-ing on how windproof it is.
A suitable fi re in the shelter grants a further +2 bo-nus. In some cases, lighting a fi re may cause additional problems (like melting the roof of an ice cave).
FREQUENCY OF VIGOR ROLLS
So long as the modifi ers from winter clothing worn
by the heroes, Edges granting resistance to cold, or shel-ter provide a Vigor modifi er equal to or higher than the Vigor penalty above, don’t force them to make regular Vigor rolls. Characters shouldn’t be punished for taking sensible precautions.
If the Vigor penalty is higher than the combined clothing’s protection, Edge modifi ers, and shelter’s bo-nus, use the difference to see how often the hero must make a Vigor roll, as shown on the table below.
Example: A Saxa hero wearing winter clothing has +2 to Vigor rolls to resist cold weather. He can wander the Low Winterlands in winter (–2 Vigor penalty,) in normal conditions, without making regular Vigor rolls.
If the same hero entered the outer Hellfrost region (–4 Vigor penalty), he would have an effective modifi er of –2 and would need to make a Vigor roll every 2 hours to resist the cold.
If he constructed an average shelter (+2 bonus to re-sist the Cold), he would not have to make a roll so long as he stayed inside as his effective bonus would be +2.
VIGOR ROLL FREQUENCY TABLE
Vigor Mod Frequency –1 4 hours –2 2 hours –3 1 hour –4 30 minutes –5 15 minutes –6 1 minute
TERRAIN & MOVEMENT
Certain terrain, such as ice, affects how easily a hero can move in a combat round. Likewise, terrain plays an important roll in how far the heroes can travel over the course of a day.
TACTICAL TERRAIN
These rules are used when playing out movement on
the tabletop during combats. Travel through such terrain outside of combat is covered in the next section, Over-land Pace.
ICE PLAINS AND SNOWFIELDS
Flat, featureless terrain can easily fool a traveler into misjudging distances. With no landmarks to use as refer-ence, distances can seem much longer or shorter than they really are. In such locales, Notice rolls and all Shoot-ing rolls beyond 12” suffer a –2 penalty.
These barren regions do contain plants and animals, even water (eating snow is a bad thing) if you know where to look, but it takes a skilled eye. Survival rolls to fi nd edible plants or animals suffer a –4 penalty.
FOREST
Forests are rated as light, medium, or heavy, which coincides with the Cover rules. In spring and summer, deciduous forests are treated as above. In fall and win-ter, the rating of deciduous forests drops one level (to a minimum of none) to account for less foliage and ground vegetation.
Evergreen forests, which do not lose foliage or have much ground vegetation, retain the same rating all year round.
Heavy and medium forests are treated as diffi cult ground.
Forests automatically grant targets the benefi ts of Cover against ranged weapons because of the vegetation.
Notice rolls are likewise penalized and suffer a pen-alty equal to the appropriate Cover modifi er.
Large animals, such as horses, traveling through un-dergrowth have a penalty to their Stealth rolls equal to the Cover modifi er.
There is a +1 bonus to Survival rolls to fi nd food and water made in a forest during spring and fall, a +2 in summer, and a –2 in winter.
ICE, ROUGH
Rough ice can be found in natural ice fi elds, and is also the fl ooring used in many dwarven cities.
Rough ice is treated as diffi cult ground for all move-ment. Anytime a character runs, a 1 on the running die means he has slipped and fallen at the point where his run began.
Agility rolls involving other forms of movement (such as avoiding an area-effect attack or a Trick such as run-ning up an ice wall) suffer a –2 penalty. If the Agility roll fails, the character falls and is Shaken.
ICE, SMOOTH
Smooth ice counts as diffi cult terrain, and characters cannot run on it. Agility rolls involving other movement suffer a –4 penalty. If the roll fails, the character falls and is Shaken.
OVERLAND PACE
Use this quick system when the heroes are traveling
across country, whether on foot or riding.
GENERIC SETTING RULES
Usually time can be estimated or even ignored, but in some adventures it may be imperative to know exactly how long it takes a party to make a journey.
Generally, an adventuring party would actually walk for around 8 hours a day. Including time spent to break camp, meal breaks or rest stops along the route, and erect a new camp, most groups would spend around 12 hours involved in overland move-ment.
Any character or mount can travel a number of miles equal to its Pace in 2 hours—for obvious reasons, a group would have to travel at the Pace of its slowest member. For this kind of distance traveled, Pace is modifi ed by the factors listed below.
Modifi er Condition Terrain +1 Road or open plains 0 Average path or trail –1 Standard terrain with no path or trail or dif-
fi cult ground with a trail or path
Half Pace Diffi cult ground with no trail or path (before other modifi ers)
Darkness –1 Dim –2 Dark –4 Pitch Darkness Inclement weather –1 Rain or snow –2 Storm –4 Blizzard or thunderstorm
If enough negative modifi ers apply to reduce Pace below 1 mile an hour, add the value of any remaining penalties to the time needed to travel that 1 mile.
Example: A hero with a Pace of 6 can travel six miles in two hours normally.
If he were traveling through a forest with no trail (Diffi cult Ground) in the Dark during a storm, he could only cover a single mile every four hours (Halved Pace of 3 for the terrain, –2 for darkness gives a 1.
The –2 from the storm adds its value of 2 to the time needed, increasing it from 2 hours to 4).
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
ICE RIGGERS
Ice riggers move their Top Speed in miles per hour overland (remembering they cannot use oars). They can only move over ice or snow and cannot enter any forest, marshes, steep hills, or mountainous terrain.
SADDLE SORE
Riding long distances can be a very painful experi-ence. For each week spent journeying overland on a mount, heroes must make a Riding roll at –2 to account for sore muscles and bruises. Failure means the hero gains a level of Fatigue.
Recovery requires 1d4 days of rest—preferably in a bath or steam house where he can soak his brand new aches and pains—which removes all Fatigue levels from this source.
OTHER RULES
These rules cover other situations encountered in Rassilon. Like any climate based rules, you shouldn’t overuse the ones presented here. So long as the heroes are being careful and are properly attired, the rules for frostburn and snow blindness needn’t be used except in the direst situations.
COLDFIRE
One of the great wonders of the Hellfrost is coldfi re.
Coldfi re has all the properties of regular fi re, except it burns cold with a blue-white fl ame, rather than hot with a red-orange one. Even so, it has the magical property of being able to melt metal, and is thus used by frost dwarves in their forges.
Coldfi re exists naturally, spewing from ice volcanoes, but can also be created by burning icewood. This valu-able wood can be ignited with coldfi re or regular fi re, but always burns with a coldfi re fl ame.
Coldfi re is treated like regular fi re for the purposes of damage and catching fi re, but it deals cold damage. As such, creatures resistant or immune to cold take less damage from it, and creatures susceptible to heat and fi re take no extra damage.
FROSTBURN
Characters that touch a very cold surface (12 degrees
F or lower) without gloves risk becoming stuck to the ob-ject. They must make a Strength roll to free themselves, with a penalty equal to half the Vigor modifi er for the surface temperature (round down).
With success, they pull free but suffer a –1 penalty to all rolls involving the affected limb for 24 hours, as they tear off a swathe of skin. A successful Healing roll at –2 removes this penalty. On a raise, they pull free with no penalty.
Warming the object to above 12 degrees allows a char-acter to pull free without making a Strength roll.
IMMERSION
Although the Hellfrost and Hearthlands can appear
frozen solid, rivers and pools of icy-cold water lurk be-neath the often thin surface.
A character immersed in icy water must make a Vigor roll every round to resist the effects of cold. Winter clothing or furs provide only half their usual protection (rounded down).
Once out of the water, winter clothing only offers half protection (round down) until it is dry. Drying out winter clothes takes an hour per point of cold protec-tion they provide and requires both a temperature above freezing and somewhere out of the constant wind (such as a tent).
LIGHT SOURCES
Light sources provide normal illumination within
their listed range. A candle, for example, provides clear light in a 2” radius, a torch in a 4” radius.
These sources cast Dim light (–1) at up to twice the listed radius. Anything up to three times the listed ra-dius is in Darkness (–2). Anything beyond that cannot be seen.
Characters with Low Light Vision see the same ranges but ignore the penalties for Dim and Dark light. They are just as blind beyond that range as humans.
Infravision works somewhat differently. The character sees as described, but can also see any source of warmth in the darkness area beyond.
NATURAL HEALING
Characters make Natural Healing rolls every four days,
rather than every fi ve days as normal in Savage Worlds. This equates to half a week in Rassilon.
SNOW BLINDNESS
Characters that travel the frozen wastes without ad-
equate eye protection are subject to snow blindness. Note that Blind characters do not suffer from snow blindness.
Every four hours of daylight spent moving across a snow or ice field, the character must make a Vigor roll. There is a cumulative –1 penalty for each ad-ditional four-hour period. A hero who rests his eyes for one hour out of every four can avoid this penalty, though it does slow down his progress. On a failure, the victim suffers a –6 penalty to all trait rolls involving sight (including combat). His Parry drops to 2.
Recovery: Requires a successful Healing roll, and the hero must rest his eyes in total darkness for 24 hours. This roll may be attempted only once every 24 hours.
GENERIC SETTING RULES
THIN ICE
Ice and snow can form over water to form a thin crust
through which unwary travelers can fall, plunging into the waters below. Worse still are the icy skins which form over deep crevasses and gullies.
Ice through which a character could possibly fall into water, a crevasse, or some other hazard is labeled as very thin, thin, medium, thick, or very thick. When a character passes over very thin ice roll, a d4, for thin ice, roll a d6, medium, a d8, thick, a d10, and very thick, a d12. If a die comes up 1, the character falls through to whatever awaits him below.
Size Mods: For every +2 Size a creature has, reduce the die by one type when rolling, to see if the ice can support it. A die dropping below a d4 mean the creature automatically falls through if it steps on the ice.
For negative Size, increase the die one step for each point of Size (so a typical engro at Size –1 would roll a d6 for very thin ice, d8 for thin, and so on). Should the adjusted die type be above d12, the creature has no chance of falling through the ice.
Gear Mods: Increase the die type by one step if the character has snowshoes, skis, or wide feet (for mon-sters), as these help distribute the load. Again, a die raised over a d12 means the character has no chance of falling through the ice.
BREAKING THE ICE
At some point a character may wish to try and break the ice under a foe’s feet so he drops through. This is treated exactly as Breaking Things in the core rules. Fire and heat magic causes double damage when used to melt ice.
When using magic specifi cally to break ice, bolt affects only a 1” square, but burst and blast affect all ice under their template.
If the damage exceeds the ice’s Toughness, a 1” square breaks (or all ice under a template), revealing whatever lies beneath. Large creatures require two squares beneath their base to be broken, and Huge creatures require four squares in order for them to fall through.
TYPICAL ICE TOUGHNESS
Rating Toughness Damage Type Very thin 6 Blunt, Piercing, Cutting Thin 8 Blunt, Cutting Medium 12 Blunt, Cutting Thick 16 Blunt, Cutting Very thick 20 Blunt, Cutting
DIVINE AID
Legends tell of how ancient heroes beseeched the gods for aid in times of desperate need. Sometimes the gods
even listened and responded. Despite the Compact forbid-ding actual divine intervention, there is no clause limiting the gods from giving hints or inspiration to their followers.
First, the beseeching character must have a patron de-ity and can only ask his patron for assistance. The gods refuse to listen to those not of their faith.
Second, he may not have any bennies left. So long as he has bennies remaining—representing his fate—the gods will not interfere.
Third, the character must make a Spirit (–4) roll, modifi ed as below.
On a success, the character receives one benny, two with a raise. These are lost at the end of the current ses-sion if not used. Should the character fail, he receives no bennies. With a critical failure, or if the fi nal total is below 1, the character has offended the god and cannot earn any bennies for the rest of this session and the entirety of the next session (so he starts the next game session with no bennies). This gods do not look well upon those who ask for their aid too often.
Modifi er Reason Clergy +2 Character has Disciple Edge –1 Clergy suffering minor sin –2 Clergy suffering major sin N/A Clergy suffering mortal sin Sacrifi ces +4 Sacrifi ce of 1,000 gs worth of goods or animals +2 Sacrifi ce of 500 gs worth of goods or animals +1 Sacrifi ce of 250 gs worth of goods or animals Multiple Requests* –1 Per additional request this year –2 Per additional request this month –4 Per additional request this adventure –6 Per additional request this session * Use the highest penalty only.
WEREGILD
Every man and woman of the civilized races have a monetary value attached to them based on their social status. Commoners may have more useful skills than a noble, but nobles receive a higher price because of their burden of responsibility and the chaos injuring or killing a noble can cause for an entire realm.
The table below is the price for a man’s life. The full price is paid for killing someone, whether Wild Card or Extra. Eighty percent is payable for Incapacitating a Wild Card victim, 60% for infl icting three wounds, 40% for two, and just 20% for one wound. A mere 10% is pay-able for a fi ght involving non–lethal damage, such as a fi stfi ght, or if the victim was only Shaken. Incapacitated Extras who recover to become walking wounded are entitled to 40% in compensation.
Weregild does not apply to injuries sustained on the battlefi eld, nor to bandits, outlaws, and other criminals.
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
REFUSAL TO PAY
Weregild fi nes can only be imposed by the courts or nobles of the land, and thus a case must be presented to them.
Once a judgment is made, however, it becomes the guilty party’s responsibility to pay within one month (32 days) or face further legal action, such as confi scation of property or being ordered to work off the debt as a thrall (an indentured servant). The GM must determine such details.
WEREGILD TABLE
This table lists the values of weregild. As can be clearly seen, life at the lower end of the social spectrum is extremely cheap, despite the fact it is the peasants and crafters who contribute the most to society.
Only the Anari noble titles are given on the table be-low for reasons of space. Check the Noble Edge on page 16 for other noble titles.
Social Status Weregild (gs) Commoner 50 Crafter or merchant 500 Warrior 1,000 Cleric or mage 2,000 Knight or banneret 4,000 Baron 8,000
Count 32,000 Duke 64,000 Prince 125,000 King 250,000
Cleric or Mage: This varies considerably by type and realm. A heahwisard is always treated according to his noble rank, for instance, even outside the Magocracy. A hrimwisard in the Hearthlands may receive no compen-sation because he is considered “evil” by the local court.
A cleric of any evil god is very unlikely to ever try and claim weregild in the civilized lands, and in most realms, such a claim would be automatically rejected and the cleric arrested.
Crafter: Any hero with a Knowledge (Craft) skill at a d6 or higher qualifi es for this social position by default of his trade.
Warrior: Any hero with Fighting, Shooting, or Throw-ing at d8+ falls into this category.
THE WEATHER
For the most part, the effects of the weather are something the GM can control to suit his adventure. If the characters are looking to set sail in their ice-rigger to catch a foe you don’t want caught just yet, have a blizzard delay their departure. By the time it clears, the villain is
long gone and his tracks are covered. Sometimes though, it’s just fun to
let the dice play God. Here’s a simple chart which applies to all regions of Rassilon. Specifi c rules for various weather hazards can be found in the Hellfrost Bestiary.
WEATHER TABLE
d20 Weather 1–3 Clear skies 4–8 10% chance of precipitation, else overcast (treat as clear skies in the Glittersands) 9–10 25% chance of precipitation, else overcast (2% in the Glit tersands) 11–12 50% chance of precipitation, else overcast (5% in the Glit tersands) 13–14 75% chance of precipitation, else overcast (10% in the Glit tersands) 15 Light fog 16 Dense fog 17 Warm spell 18 Cold snap 19 Heavy snow 20 Blizzard
MOD MOD
PARRY
TOUGHNESS
HERO
CHARISMA PACE
ATTRIBUTES
RACE
AGILITY
SMARTS
STREGNTH
SPIRIT
VIGOR WOUNDS -1 -2 -3
FATIGUE
-2 -1INC
SKILLS
GEAR
SPELLS COST RANGE DAMAGE/EFFECT DURATION
RANGE ROF DAMAGE AP WTWEAPONS
TOTAL WT CARRIED WEIGHT LIMIT ENCUMBRANCE PENALTY
HINDRANCES
EDGES
5 10 15 S20 25 30 35 V40 45 50 55 H60 65 70 75 L80 90 100 110
GLORY
20 40 60 80 100 120
MOD
MOD
HELLFROST: PLAYER’S GUIDE
Abyss, The 60, 61 Alchemical Devices 58 Anari 3, 4, 7, 12-17, 31, 39, 41, 45, 55,
57, 68, 73, 105, 109-112, 114, 116, 117, 119, 126
Armor 8, 11, 12, 15, 19, 21, 27, 33-35, 38-42, 53, 55, 56, 57, 62, 65, 74, 76, 78, 79, 82, 83
Bandits 105, 110 Barge 39 Black Ice 32 Blizzard War 3, 5, 8, 10, 12-14, 28, 29,
31, 39, 45, 50-53, 59, 74, 105, 106, 107, 110-112, 114-116, 118-120
Bludgeoners 4, 28, 115 Bridgewater 111, 118 Burial 66, 73, 104, 110 Busse 38 Calendar 105, 106 Carriage 39 Castle 41, 118 Clergy 60, 61, 63-65, 67, 68, 69, 70-73,
75-77, 125 Coldfi re 35, 43, 52, 56, 79, 80, 89,
113, 124 Coldfi re Sea 113 Compact, The 59, 60, 125 Convocation, The 4, 114, 115 Crime 104 Crystalfl ow River 111 Currency 31 Curse 51, 56 Deities 20-23 Drakkar 39 Druidism 30, 53 Edges 23-30 Elementalism 26, 27, 37, 52, 53 Elemental Loci 52 Engros 4, 10, 16, 110, 118 Eostremonan 105, 106 Falmonan 106 Finnar 3, 4, 7, 12, 13, 14, 16, 31, 34,
109, 110, 115 Fire Magic 50, 51 Fogmonan 71, 74, 106 Fort 41 Fortifi cations 40 Frostborn 4, 7, 11, 12, 114 Frostburn 124 Frosttongue 7, 112 Galley 39 Glory 6, 9, 30, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103,
104 Glory Benefi ts Combat prowess 103 Connection 103 Death & Honor 103 Favored 103 Followers 103 Heroic Aura 103 Heroic Status 103
Immortalized in Song 104 Leader of Men 104 Sidekick 104 Glyphs 69, 81, 86, 110 Gold Scield 111 Goods 32, 44 Gray Legion, The 28, 116 Haerfestmonan 64, 106 Heahwisard 5, 54 Heahwisardry 15, 17, 25, 37, 54, 55 Hearth Knights 4-6, 24, 28, 41, 74,
102, 103, 110, 112, 114, 116, 117 Hearthlands, The 3-6, 8, 9-13, 28, 30,
31, 36, 60, 68, 74, 75, 90, 105, 106, 108, 110, 111, 113, 114, 115, 117-120, 124, 126
Hedge Magic 28, 45, 58 Hegmonan 64, 106 Hellfrost, The 3-8, 10-13, 15, 16, 24,
25, 28, 32, 38, 40, 45, 49-52, 55, 58, 60, 61, 68, 69, 74, 75, 79, 80-82, 94, 99, 101, 103, 105, 106, 110-114, 116, 117, 119, 121, 122, 124, 126
Herbalism 45 Hindrances Apprentice/Novitiate 15 Black Sheep 15 Cold Blooded 15 God Cursed 15 Magic Forbiddance 16 Necromantic Weakness 16 Orders 16 Horse 39, 42, 44 Hospitality 13 Hrimwisardry 11, 37, 55, 58 Huntianmonan 76, 106 Ice 4, 5, 32, 38, 39, 40, 74, 79, 94, 106,
114, 122, 124, 125 Ice Riggers 124 Immersion 124 Iron Guild 5, 16, 17, 28, 65, 78, 111,
118, 119 Iron Guildhouse 111, 112 Kennings 57 Knarr 39 Knights Hrafn 4, 5, 29, 76, 114, 118 Lance Knights 113, 117 Legendary Relics 58 Lorekeepers 17, 24, 29, 38, 71, 112,
118, 119 Maerathril 33 Magic 4, 8, 16, 17, 21, 27, 28, 37, 45,
49, 50-52, 56-58, 69, 111 Magocracy 5, 7, 12, 13, 15, 17, 37,
49, 54, 55, 109, 110, 111, 114, 118, 126
Melee 34, 42 Moon 50, 105, 107 Mundane Gear 36-37 Natural Healing 46, 124 Necromancy 61, 80
Negative Glory 104 Noble Titles 16 Oaths 68, 104 Overland Pace 11, 12, 15, 19, 20, 37,
122 Patron 60 Plohmonan 64, 105, 106 Primitive Weapons 34, 42 Ranged Weapons 35, 43 Rassilon 3-10, 12, 28-31, 40, 45, 49,
50, 58, 59, 61, 63, 79, 81, 93, 99-101, 103-111, 114, 115, 116, 120, 124, 126
Reliquary 6, 17, 29, 30, 58, 69, 71, 119
River Barge 39 Roadwardens 6, 30, 65, 110, 111, 113,
114, 119 Rowboat 39 Rune Magic 27, 56 Saddle Sore 124 Saxa 3, 4, 7, 12, 13, 14, 16, 20, 31, 39,
40, 41, 45, 56, 57, 73, 74, 81, 109, 110, 111, 114, 117, 120, 122
Sceranmonan 64, 106 Scrapsdaeg 109 Siege Weapons 35, 43 Silver Shield 111 Siphoning, The 27, 45, 49, 50, 51, 52,
54, 55, 94, 114 Sisterhood of Mercy 119 Skalds 4, 6, 7, 9, 14, 57, 99, 107 Skeid 39 Slaying 104 Sledge 40 Smabyrding 39 Snaermonan 105, 106 Snow Blindness 124 Song Magic 37, 57 Sowanmonan 64, 105, 106 Spells 80-96 Star Metal 33 Sun 74, 107 Taiga Elves 3, 4, 7, 13, 14, 15, 113,
114 The Blizzard War 3, 114 The Reliquary 30, 119 Thieves’ Guilds 120 Thirteen Warriors, The 120 Tower 35, 41, 43 Trade Routes 110, 111 Travel Towers 110, 119 Tuomi 7, 14, 16, 110 War Sledge 40 Weapons 33-35, 39, 42, 43, 91 Weregild 109, 125, 126 Werremonan 64, 73, 75, 105, 106 Winterlands 3, 105, 106, 111, 113,
114, 122 Wood Wardens 4, 120 Wulfmonan 105, 106
INDEX
AN ENDLESS WINTER IS COMING.
The history of Rassilon is bloody. From the frozen far north, beyond the civilized lands
with their rolling hills and forests, arose a mighty army of frost giants, ice devils,
Hellfrost dragons, and fearsome orcs, servants all of the ice god Thrym. So began the terrible Blizzard War and the downfall of the mighty
empires of man.
Five hundred years later the races of the southern lands may have won the war, but they suffer its legacy still. For five centuries the winters have grown steadily longer and colder. Huge swathes of the land of Rassilon
are permanently covered in ice and snow, and even the temperate lands are not spared the
misery of failed harvests, deadly winters, and the dreaded Hellfrost wind.
But winter is not the only danger. A mere 30 years ago, magic, once the civilized races’ most
potent weapon, suddenly began to fail. The Siphoning, an effect of unknown origin, has
made magic an unpredictable ally.
Welcome to the world of Rassilon. Welcome to the Hellfrost!
The Hellfrost Player’s Guide contains everything you need to begin adventuring in the frozen wastes:
•
Six player character races.
•
Dozens of new Edges, including Disciple Edges for religious heroes.
•
Six alternate magical Arcane Backgrounds.
•
Details on 24 deities and their followers.
•
Rules for Glory, a new trait that measures the great deeds of your heroes.
•
Complete setting rules for adventuring in Rassilon.
Hellfrost: Player’s Guide is an epic fantasy setting for the award-winning Savage Worlds RPG
